Author
Nacer Lalam, Institut des hautes études du ministère de 
l’Intérieur (IHEMI) Ecole militaire, Paris, France
2022
An analysis of cash collection 
systems related 
to the European drug market 
Background paper commissioned by the EMCDDA

1 
 
This Background paper was commissioned by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug 
Addiction (EMCDDA) (contract CT.21.SAS0056.1.0). We are grateful for the valuable contribution of 
the author. The paper has been cited within various reports and is also being made available online 
for those who would like further information on the topic. However, the views, interpretations and 
conclusions set out in this publication are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the 
EMCDDA or its partners, any EU Member State or any agency or institution of the European Union. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
Contents 
 
Introduction.............................................................................................................................................. 3 
A. The main actors .................................................................................................................................. 4 
A.1. The collector ................................................................................................................................. 5 
Methods for recruiting collectors ...................................................................................................... 5 
A.2. The facilitator ................................................................................................................................ 6 
An essential tool: the banknote counting machines ........................................................................ 7 
A.3. An example of a ‘super-facilitator’: the Saraf ................................................................................. 7 
B. The organisational aspects of the shadow banking system ............................................................. 10 
B.1. Reducing transaction costs: the role of trust .............................................................................. 11 
B.2. Social capital: a key notion in understanding the networks ....................................................... 12 
B.3. A money-laundering channel that is more opaque and linked to the complex finance and trade 
flows between China and France ...................................................................................................... 14 
B.4. Some benchmarks of the Chinese banking system ................................................................... 15 
C. The public response: an unequal consideration ............................................................................... 17 
C.1. Some European countries are more heavily impacted due to a prevalence of criminal activities
 ........................................................................................................................................................... 17 
Spain .............................................................................................................................................. 17 
Italy................................................................................................................................................. 18 
The Netherlands ............................................................................................................................ 19 
C.2. Analysis ...................................................................................................................................... 20 
Conclusion............................................................................................................................................. 21 
Bibliography .......................................................................................................................................... 23 
Annex 1: Interview guide — questionnaire ........................................................................................... 24 
 
 
 

3 
 
Introduction 
Money laundering is practised exclusively by criminal organisations that have attained a proven level 
of professionalism. It occurs at a certain point in the criminal cycle because it enables an illicit 
enterprise to legitimise the origin of their funds and benefit from their gains while remaining 
unpunished. Nonetheless, most professional traffickers think in a sequential manner, that is, first they 
are interested in how to set up their activity (purchase, logistics, distribution) and only much later in 
how they are going to hide the origin of the profits they make. 
However, the money-laundering phase is crucial for those involved in the criminal world. 
Moreover, public authorities have been working to combat money laundering for more than thirty 
years, with, of course, varying degrees of success, depending on the relevant legal provisions, their 
application and preventive effects. 
In the context of the European drug market, this paper provides an exploratory analysis of a method 
of laundering drug money that law enforcement agencies (LEAs) identify through the use of ‘cash 
collectors’. We first highlight the main actors of cash collecting linked to drug trafficking, then we 
discuss its organisation, especially the interpenetration of networks, and, finally, we highlight some 
salient elements of public responses to the problem in a number of European countries. 
From a methodological point of view, qualitative material was mainly obtained from the French 
Judicial Police (OCRGDF-DCPJ) (1) and from interviews conducted with public authorities in charge 
of anti-money laundering operations in Spain, Italy and the Netherlands, first in the second half of 
2019, and further in the second half of 2021. From the outset, it emerged that knowledge of the 
phenomenon is unevenly distributed and undoubtedly should be shared more widely in order to 
update a number of criminal police services and thus make government responses to this threat more 
effective. This study is based on case studies that involve many European countries (cases known as 
‘Virus’, ‘Retrovirus’, ‘Emporio’ and ‘Kouri’). Significant data are available from police records. 
In addition to France, three other countries — Spain, the Netherlands and Italy — have been 
subjected to specific scrutiny, and the criteria underlying this choice are based on practical reasons 
pertaining to cooperation with the French judicial police specialised in fighting financial crime. The 
interviews were conducted with members of law enforcement agencies specialised in anti-money 
laundering investigations and with experts from the respective financial intelligence units of each 
country. A questionnaire was used to conduct the interviews. The preliminary contacts suggest that 
there is no systematic statistical data on this type of money laundering either at the national or 
European level. At least two experts (LEA and scholars) were interviewed in each country (see 
Annexes 1 and 2). 
Drug revenues are considered to be the principal source of criminal proceeds, especially in relation to 
the supply of cannabis in Europe. This means that it is necessary to distinguish between the part of 
this income that will be laundered and the part that will be reinvested in the criminal economy. 
This exploratory study emphasises how an underground banking system has emerged for drug 
traffickers, with the understanding that it is mostly used for legal practices (e.g., remittances). Without 
doubt, the stringent anti-money laundering controls placed on financial institutions have led criminals 
to become more reliant on the services and skills provided by professionals to manage their illicit 
funds. The ‘informal value transfer system’ appears to have the capacity to deal with huge amounts of 
money while offering a limited risk of interception and a real potential to circumvent detection 
strategies. Cash collection systems are a combination of sophisticated and artisanal methods. For 
instance, the collectors use encryption techniques for their communications and, at the same time, 
they hide the banknotes in ordinary sports bags. 
 
(1) Office central pour la répression de la grande délinquance financière. Direction centrale de la police judiciaire. 

4 
 
Our analysis operates at different levels, mainly at the micro level, focusing on the sociodemographic 
profiles of the actors involved in the cash collection system, their skills and abilities, their earnings and 
the role of the extended family. At the meso level, the report looks at the organisational aspects of this 
informal banking system, the networks, the cultural references and trade-based money laundering. 
The last section is dedicated to public policy analysis — especially in an international context, with an 
emphasis on the problematic issue of cooperation between countries. 
A. The main actors 
According to Ben Lakhdar (2013), it appears that, schematically, cannabis distribution networks in 
France are made up of four different strata of actors: the wholesale seller upstream of the distribution 
line; an intermediary A; an intermediary B; and the retail dealer. Cannabis trafficking is said to be 
unprofitable at the bottom level of distribution. In fact, the ‘small’ street dealers, the most numerous 
group, earn limited sums of money, while the intermediaries in the trafficking chain, just below the 
semi-wholesalers, tend to spend the proceeds of their drug dealing ostentatiously but do not resort to 
money-laundering techniques. Thus, in many cases, drug money responds to a logic of individual 
social promotion based on a need for social recognition. Most drug dealers do not project themselves 
into a logic of accumulation, but rather blow the money they make by purchasing luxury products. 
They follow a short-term logic, in the process sacrificing their prospects of legal integration. It might be 
said that this is the most basic, most primitive way of laundering money, by diluting the sums earned 
in the legal economy. These traffickers generally only handle cash. Semi-wholesalers, on the other 
hand, make enough profit to consider using financial engineering to conceal the origin of the money 
made from the resale of cannabis. The traffickers who resort to money-laundering techniques are 
actually few compared to the mass of small dealers and intermediaries. Among the population that 
profits from drug trafficking, the majority rather use what can be described as artisanal methods. At 
this stage, let us mention the method of expatriating funds abroad. This rudimentary method is 
gaining renewed interest from criminals given the increasing control over deposits implemented by the 
banking system. Once these funds arrive in the destination country, they are invested in small 
businesses or real estate; they can also be placed in local banks and then transferred again to France 
(in the cases cited in our research), thus justifying new bank loans. 
It is not a question of listing all laundering techniques, but rather of focusing on those that enable the 
trafficker to solve the equation balance the cost of laundering against minimizing minimising the risk of 
detection and interception. Some traffickers are willing to pay a significant percentage of their turnover 
to enjoy the benefits from of a reliable and trustworthy money- laundering method. However, the 
traffickers’ rationale often leads them to look for inexpensive methods. The margins charged by the 
intermediaries and the transaction costs (with regard to implementing the strategy and managing the 
risk) are likely to deter traffickers from undertaking money laundering, which could explain why some 
of them hide cash in more or less elaborate hiding places. Others, given the control mechanisms set 
up within the banking system, may use so-called clearing methods (characterised by reduced 
management fees, lack of formalities, etc.), one of which is called Hawala. 
Hawala is an informal financial network based on centuries-old practices of mutual assistance, which 
was originally justified by the weakness of the formal banking network, particularly in South Asia. A 
migrant worker sending money to his family is an example of the use of this technique. It is an 
informal remittance system (Passas, 2005) used in various parts of the world to move capital from 
one country to another. Based on a ‘contract of trust’ (ethnicity, same village, etc.), it is cheap, quick 
and less bureaucratic than the formal financial system. Considered legitimate by many international 
organisations (of the United Nations system), Hawala can however be diverted from its primary 
mission, with the reduced formalities and relative anonymity making it easy to use for money 
laundering and financing illicit activities. 

5 
 
At one end of the drug trafficking supply chain, distribution networks handle large amounts of cash. To 
transfer their profits abroad they employ different methods, but the use of collectors is the one 
currently preferred and is becoming more prevalent. 
Three main levels can be identified: the collector, the facilitator (or supervisor) and the ‘superfacilitator’. 
A.1. The collector 
This analysis focuses on what are known as ‘cash collectors’ because they represent the largest 
number of actors in this money laundering process, and, like street traffickers, they tend to conceal 
the true nature of the system in which they work. Indeed, collectors are in touch with the informal 
economy, and this fact along with their community ties mean that they are chosen to perform a basic 
but trusted function. 
Both the drug trafficking and money laundering sectors are rather singular and marked by their level 
of specialisation and professionalisation. Many of the collectors do not know the remitter, nor where 
the money comes from. The meeting points for cash delivery are very unremarkable, for example, 
near a fast-food restaurant belonging to a well-known chain, or a petrol station. 
Based on approximately 10 cases from three European countries, collectors appear to be 
predominantly men, ranging in age from 25 to over 60, and able to speak at least two languages, 
although they often have a low level of qualifications; they are also unlikely to have a significant 
criminal record. While they are discreet, they are not familiar with police surveillance techniques. Most 
of them have little or no awareness of the scale of the penalties that can be incurred. 
The collectors generally are members of an extended family, which suggests they can rely on their 
relatives to do certain tasks. 
As indicated, where information is available, it appears that collectors’ level of education is relatively 
low. However, there was one collector who presented himself as a student. We should specify that 
the required expertise seems attainable; what is expected is rather social skills, such as reliability, 
punctuality and discretion. Among those acting as collectors, we find, for example, cab drivers, 
ambulance drivers and deliverymen, indicating that mobility is an asset in this context. 
It should be added that the collectors are in contact with cash and not with illicit drugs, which 
contributes to a feeling of being less reprehensible, even if the transactions involve very large 
amounts of money. 
The collector gets paid a small percentage (not more than 1 %) of the money collected, which he 
receives at each collection operation. The average transaction is around EUR 200 000 to 
EUR 300 000. The unit of account is approximately EUR 100 000 and the global amount, in the 
course of one year, can reach several million euros. 
Methods for recruiting collectors 
Over the last 10 years or so, ‘underground banking’ and in particular the intervention of collectors, has 
played a major role in drug money laundering circuits. Collectors have thus established themselves 
during the first stage, known as the placement phase. The pre-existing system, relatively basic in its 
implementation, has now become more professional. Initial recruitment in family circles close to the 
‘broker’ or ‘super-facilitator’ has been extended to other people in concentric circles further removed 
from the nuclear family. These are primarily so-called patriarchal These are primarily so-called 
patriarchal families, that are characterized by the saying ‘all sons marry and settle in the father’s 
home’: a controlled division of labour can thus be established, and this proximity is useful for the 
discharge of business. The laundering network is transnational and involves countries where what 
sociologists refer to as the ‘family-source’ still exists, bringing three generations together under the 

6 
 
same roof. Alongside the father and mother, one or more sons, their wives and children live together. 
In these families, the income resulting from informal activities is mixed with that from official sources. 
Recruitment from the extended family provides the most convenient point of access. After that, it 
appears that recruitment from the same village or urban neighbourhood is combined with an ethnic 
dimension, followed by recruitment among those who share the same language. A fortiori, trust 
remains the basis of this informal financial arrangement. The intersection of the anthropology of the 
family with an informal activity only reinforces the idea of the power of proximity (ensuring that one's 
family benefits from this proximity in survival or accumulation strategies). The recruitment carried out 
by the main organiser of this informal financial system is not undertaken blindly: besides trust, various 
attributes, skills and knowledge remain criteria for inclusion, such as the following (in no particular 
hierarchical order): 
► 
knowing how to move around within a more or less large geographical radius; 
► 
mastery of communication technologies (a greater exposure to and familiarity with digital 
technology); 
► 
facility with languages; 
► 
knowing how to count; 
► 
showing discretion, obeying instructions; 
► 
being uncooperative with police investigators in the event of arrest; 
► 
not using drugs or alcohol. 
 
In some networks, the organiser will choose an unemployed collector who can be motivated by the 
prospect of earning money. In others, the organiser will choose a person with a job who wants to 
increase their income. Someone with a formal job is less likely to attract the attention of the 
authorities. The sparse data available tends to show that collectors have only a minor or no criminal 
record; they do not appear to come from the criminal world. The same is true of the ‘brokers’ or 
‘super-facilitators’ who see themselves as a stockbroker, an economic actor in their own right. 
The records show that these ‘brokers’ will be located in a country where the informal economy and 
related financial systems are prevalent. The example of the Saraf in Morocco precisely illustrates this 
activity at the confluence of the informal and the formal. 
A.2. The facilitator 
The facilitator is the person who centralises the cash and may be viewed as providing a type of 
temporary storage service. Facilitators are based in an ordinary location without any special security. 
In one case for instance, in Paris, a facilitator hid large amounts of cash under the mattress in the 
room next to his grocery store. 
Facilitators occupy a strategic position in the process since they are in contact with both the collectors 
and the informal banker. They have no criminal background and occupy a hybrid space, between 
legal and illegal activities. 
The role of the facilitator is mainly to count the money and inform the banker of the amounts received 
and remitted. At this nodal point, a demand for cash from a third party (e.g., a legal import-export 
entrepreneur) can be satisfied directly with money from the drug trafficking. Part of this total will be 
given directly to third parties for cash, and some will physically travel to other destinations (e.g., North 
Africa, Belgium, the Netherlands, etc.). 
 

7 
 
An essential tool: the banknote counting machines 
Among the objects often discovered during police searches are banknote counting machines, some of 
which are quite sophisticated and expensive. 
There is a wide range of banknote counting machines (costing from EUR 65 to EUR 2 000), the most 
expensive one counts 1 200 banknotes per minute, and can detect false currency. The banknote 
counting machine is put to use as soon as the collectors bring the cash to the facilitator in order to 
count the number and the value of banknotes. The main denominations are 10 euros, 20 euros and 
50 euros. 
According to one arrested collector, there was concern over the noise generated by the machine and 
the risk that the neighbours would ask questions. 
This machine is highly valued because the data it delivers (number of bills and face value) is hard to 
question. All the actors involved in this process own this type of machine. 
A.3. An example of a ‘super-facilitator’: the Saraf 
The figure of the ‘super-facilitator’ is known as the ‘broker’ (2) in Latin America and the Saraf in North 
African countries. These individuals may operate in markets, bazaars, the backroom of a telephone 
shop, a butcher's shop, a hairdresser’s, or even within the public space, as can be seen in Pakistan 
and Afghanistan where street hawaladars, people (or places) that facilitate hawala transactions, 
outnumber the branches of official bank. 
The Saraf, who presents themself as the head of a stock exchange or financial office, is in reality an 
actor inserted in the local economy. They facilitate access to local currency for holders of international 
currencies and vice versa at exchange rates that are more attractive than those offered by legal 
banks. In addition to foreign exchange activity, the Saraf can negotiate loans between third parties, or 
facilitate the initiation of a tontine, and thus generally has a positive image. They do not comply with 
the rules of due diligence as enacted in the legal finance sector. The Sarafs provide a benefit to their 
clients as the money they handle comes mainly from the funds of migrant workers in foreign 
countries. Even though they operate without an official licence they keep written accounts to keep 
track of all the money transfers. Sarafs also possess better than average telecommunications 
resources. In addition, one of their areas of expertise relates to the link between trade and the 
handling of undeclared funds. The line between informal finance and micro-finance is thin. 
Furthermore, it is difficult to know what the turnover of these individuals might be. Exchange rates and 
fees are more accessible, however, giving a relative idea of the gains made by these superfacilitators: a Saraf established in one of the souks of Casablanca might earn up to several tens of 
millions of dirhams annually, or for a Saraf established in a back shop in the capital of Algeria or a 
smaller metropolis the amount might be hundreds of millions of dinars per year (3). 
Among the Sarafs, some of them are real ‘money-laundering brokers’ with obvious know-how in cash 
transportation and/or financial compensation (where the money does not necessarily cross borders). 
As bankers, fundraisers, money changers and insurers, these brokers are able to launder large sums 
of money without attracting attention. 
 
(2) What we call here the super-facilitator or broker would correspond to the banker, i.e., the person who ensures the 
consolidation of physical or non-physical movements of money and who brings the supply and demand sides together. These 
individuals also assume the role of facilitator, i.e., by ensuring the cash is initially centralised via the collectors. The collectors 
are the small fry of the organisation who handle cash collection and transport. Transposing the legal financial system, i.e., the 
banks, to the informal system remains an artificial exercise because the informal route relies on minimal infrastructure and 
therefore low structural costs. 
(3) 1 euro = 10 Moroccan dirhams; 1 euro = 160 Algerian dinars (January 2021). 

8 
 
Why do they offer their services to criminals looking for a fast and efficient structure? On the one 
hand, the profit margins are greater than those to be made from, for example, migrant workers' 
remittances (4). On the other hand, they can act as intermediaries assisting criminals in investing part 
of their profits locally, for which the Sarafs will then receive a sizable commission. These are all 
services that can be offered by the Sarafs thanks to their prominence within the community. 
Moreover, individuals tend to repeat actions that have been successful before, in the absence of any 
overriding reasons to change. 
The Sarafs can be considered as figures with local legitimacy, who grew up in a particular 
neighbourhood and know both the old notables and the young connected elite, which gives them the 
capacity to mediate between both groups. They are a type of ‘proximity elite’. Sarafs are generally 
found through word of mouth. The deals they make are mostly based on an oral commitment. Written 
records are reduced to the most basic form: a name or a pseudonym, a number even, alongside the 
amount of the transaction and a telephone number if necessary. Hybridity is also one of their 
characteristics, in the sense that they act in both the illegal (flows of criminal origin) and legal (trade, 
real estate) spheres. For example, they are able to finance a student trip abroad, or organise the 
return of the body of a deceased person from Europe. 
Sociologist Alain Tarrius has provided valuable insight into the mobility of certain fringe traders, he 
speaks of transmigration, or ‘a recent type of international migration: hundreds of thousands of small 
entrepreneurs deploy themselves in networks of advantageous resale of products for lawful uses 
without tax, all over the world, a true commercial cross-border labour force of large globalised firms, 
hindered in their expansion by the inter-state rules of official trade’. Some of these border-crossing 
transmigrants can be exploited by criminal networks to transport illicit products (drugs, counterfeits) 
and currency. Pendulum movements are emerging between North Africa, Europe and the Arabian 
Peninsula. These transmigrants operate in ‘ethnic networks and are unique in that they develop a 
code of honour, a commercial metalanguage, free of religious or ideological references, which not 
only avoids conflicts, but also synergises diversity in obtaining and distributing a product or service’ 
(Tarrius, 2002). 
The pattern which emerges from these flexible and reactive channels is thus, on one hand, 
territorial anchorage with respect to the Sarafs, and, on the other hand, transnational mobility for 
supervisors and cash collectors. While, upstream, the intervention of European law enforcement 
services disrupts these channels, downstream, on the collectors’ side, the Sarafs are difficult to reach, 
especially since they are protected to a certain extent thanks to their contacts with local authorities. 
Official state rules (the adoption and transposition of international anti-money-laundering standards) 
may thus diverge from local social standards. 
 
 
 
 
(4) The World Bank estimates that officially recorded annual remittances to low- and middle-income countries reached USD 529 
billion in 2018, an increase of 9.6 % over the previous record of USD 483 billion in 2017. Global remittances, which include 
flows to high-income countries, reached USD 689 billion in 2018, up from USD 633 billion in 2017. Among the major recipient 
countries, India leads the way with USD 79 billion, followed by China with USD 67 billion, Mexico with USD 36 billion, the 
Philippines with USD 34 billion and Egypt with USD 29 billion. 

9 
 
The ‘Virus’ case: a complex financial circuit 
The ‘Virus’ case concerned money laundering from drug trafficking between Morocco, Spain and 
France. The investigation found that drug money was laundered through clearing operations between 
France, Switzerland, UK, Morocco and China. 
Searches were performed by the French authorities on 10 October 2012. More than 40 people were 
arrested, and in Switzerland, a bank employee and an asset manager were charged with aggravated 
money laundering. This operation also resulted in the confiscation of many million euros in a few 
months. 
It was by combining a financial and criminal approach that the investigators managed to make the 
connection between cannabis trafficking and money laundering. Three brothers operated from 
France, Switzerland and Morocco. Firstly, they recovered the money from the sale of cannabis resin, 
then (in Geneva in this case) they injected the equivalent amount into a complex financial circuit 
passing through several countries: the United Kingdom, the United Arab Emirates, Spain, Morocco, 
China, and even Panama, before redistributing it to the traffickers. 
More precisely, the money from drug trafficking was transferred to retail outlets and then handed over 
in France to notables who could thus recover (in exchange for an 8 % commission) the equivalent in 
cash out of sight of the tax authorities in accounts outside France. Among the notables identified by 
the judiciary who benefited from the system were a local elected official, a lawyer, a dentist, an art 
dealer, a doctor, a sound engineer, an entrepreneur and two company directors. With the motive of 
evading taxes, all of them profited, often without knowing it, from cash coming directly from drug 
trafficking 
Those responsible only for collecting the money were not drug traffickers; their role was to deposit the 
cash in a local business, where it was received by a ‘main collector’. In just six months, 182 
collections were identified, with a total value of over EUR 7 million. Invariably, the money that entered 
the small supermarket ended up leaving in the same way, in plastic bags. The money passed from 
hand to hand, from traffickers to collectors, then from collectors to notables, without ever leaving the 
Paris region. The affair continued on the other side of the Franco-Swiss border, in Geneva, where two 
of the brothers managed the opaque phases of the operation. The first brother, a financial engineering 
professional, worked as an executive at HSBC Private Bank. The second brother had taken over a 
financial management company that hosted a charity, thus creating a philanthropic facade which 
concealed the money laundering activity that was the true purpose of the organisation. On a daily 
basis, several employees of the management company were in charge of maintaining ‘commercial 
fictions’ attached to hundreds of trusts, family foundations and other offshore companies sheltering 
hidden funds. The investigations also brought to light the existence of 350 trusts, mainly set up in 
Panama, thanks to the support of the law firm Mossack Fonseca. 
How did the link between Moroccan traffickers and Swiss bankers operate? The whole system set up 
by the brothers between Paris and Geneva was based on the very old modus operandi of the ‘Saraf’, 
a hidden banker at the heart of the system. In their referral order, the judges described this central 
figure as a ‘great professional, semi-official, putting his expertise at the service of criminals in 
particular’. The Sarafs’ function is to enable the exchange of international currency held by traffickers 
in Europe for local currency or arrange a transfer to a bank account. In the Virus case, the role of 
Saraf was played by a French-Moroccan man in his fifties who lived in Morocco and was a childhood 
friend of the brothers. He was the missing link and formed the connection between the two worlds. 
The principle is always the same: using a cascade of intermediaries, the Saraf collects the trafficker’s 
funds and makes them available to the tax evader. In exchange, the latter makes a bank transfer from 
his Swiss account to another foreign account designated by the trafficker, who can then freely enjoy 
his millions in Spain, Morocco or the Emirates. There is no need to cross borders. The cleared funds 
change owners without being physically moved. For each transaction, the Saraf received a 
commission of between 5 and 15 %. The judges emphasised that the system functioned with the 
complicity of multiple individuals. The multiplicity of actors guaranteed the security of the operations, 
as most of the protagonists did not know each other. 
 
 

10 
 
B. The organisational aspects of the shadow banking system 
When focusing on this method of money laundering leads it is necessary to consider the question of 
distance and proximity: the geographical distance between the principals and the collectors versus 
the cultural or affective proximity between these actors. In fact, geographical distance is not an 
obstacle to carrying out financial transactions that are not reported to the authorities, as long as trust 
remains the fundamental lubricant. Transactions are recorded on a basic document such as a 
handwritten piece of paper or notebook. 
The organisation is viewed here as an entity of cooperation between actors with a common goal, it is 
first and foremost a network of interpersonal relationships. 
What is remarkable about this type of money laundering is its great adaptability to the world of tax 
evasion and the use of certain offshore locations and shell companies. The two worlds of financial 
crime and informal finance rub shoulders without crossing paths. The so-called ‘Virus case’ in France 
provides an example of this interpenetration (see Annex 3). 
As described above, the Saraf, usually based in a third country, is the key actor in the system, 
allocating the tasks and distributing the ‘payments’. The basic subdivision of collecting (through 
supervisors or facilitators and collectors, or cash smugglers) implies cash recoveries from a member 
of the drug distribution network and the storage, dispatch and transportation of banknotes. The 
system has a less vertical structure than drug trafficking. 
The networks involved in this parallel banking system are interconnected, with the various nodes 
operating from different countries and mixing cash originating from a range of sources: illegal 
activities, remittances or trade. 
The networks themselves have interesting characteristics. Unlike legal markets, where agents tend to 
clarify areas where information is missing and choose a working organisation that minimises the cost 
of transactions, Sarafs, who organise in networks, control the circulation of information and, for 
reasons of security, use vernacular languages and codes. This is why the functioning of the network 
does not follow a single vertical path, where the hierarchy of firms corresponds to a functional division 
of the production activities. 
Beyond the immediate social circle, the community factor can also favour or even facilitate the entry 
of newcomers into this parallel banking system. In that sense, the diaspora fosters the migration 
business between the Paris region and the Rif region of Morocco. 
There is a great diversity of informal banking systems or informal value transfer systems (Passas, 
2005), some of which specialise in a particular illegal activity (e.g. drug trafficking, human trafficking) 
while others operate mainly in the field of remittances (see Figure 1). 
 
 

11 
 
Figure 1: Main characteristics of the different configurations of money laundering from the usual 
parallel banking system to collectors specialised in drug trafficking revenues 
 
Source: Interviews, 2019. 
 
Figure 1 shows, on the one hand, the specialisation of the money laundering system in terms of 
criminal activities, in particular drug trafficking, and, on the other hand, the tendency to make it an 
exclusive activity. 
B.1. Reducing transaction costs: the role of trust 
The spoken word is dominant in exchanges and contracts, even if a register may record more or 
less succinct accounting items. Trust and giving one’s word are cardinal principles: the reputation of 
both parties involved in the transaction is at stake. Failure to be true to one’s word can result in 
exclusion or bankruptcy. However, during these exchanges, which can involve several hundred 
thousand euros, critical moments arise when the collector who recovers the cash from the trafficker 
assumes a high level of risk, as does the person to whom the collected funds are to be reverted. 
These moments of handover are fleeting and the means of control are limited (surveillance, 
protection), presumably to avoid attracting attention and to limit costs. 
As already mentioned above discretion is a key requirement for collectors, hence why people 
with the most ordinary jobs are chosen for this role. In our research, few examples were provided 
regarding the use of violence and the presence of firearms in managing disputes. It would seem that 
in these money-laundering networks, the highest risks (i.e., the loss of the sums collected) are 
assumed by the Saraf, who acts as the insurer of last resort. The Saraf handles enough cash for any 
losses to be diluted or even mutualised across the bulk of transactions. This means that other 
investigation files should be consulted to determine whether the drug trafficker systematically ‘wins’ by 
using this money laundering scheme. Questions would then arise regarding the existence of any 
records or other evidence indicating the amount of the remittances made by the traffickers. This is 
relevant to the methods of investigation used, which certainly require an interest in the cash itself, but 
also in the documents and traces left by these transactions. The fact that the same Saraf can 
participate in the money laundering operations of several trafficking organisations throughout Europe 
(Spain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands) is an indication of the reach of their reputation and the 
Collectors specialised in 
drug trafficking profits 
Collectors operating across a 
large spectrum of criminal 
activities 
Opportunities (frauds) 
International level and 
connections with China 
Parallel banking system 
Bulk of cash: trade 
Credits and investments in 
various sectors 
Individual entrepreneurs 
Single activities 

12 
 
financial resources involved. 
Economic analysis (5) can provide a useful interpretative framework for reporting on the relationship 
between traffickers and collectors. Indeed, transaction costs are defined as the costs of organising 
and operating markets, as well as the costs of enforcing the rights exchanged. More specifically, 
transaction costs cover the direct costs of obtaining information on the terms of the trade (in this case, 
the reliability of the money-laundering network in which it takes place), trading costs (time, price), as 
well as indirect costs, such as losses incurred due to non-compliance with the terms of the contract or 
as a result of economic distortions created by the contract’s stipulations (e.g. the protagonists agree 
on a transfer denominated in euros and it eventually reaches the account in US dollars), which is 
known as ‘moral hazard’ (Grellet and Grellet, 1999). 
Trust is seen as a belief in, or a conjecture upon the behaviour of the other, which is assumed to be 
dictated by the pursuit of a common interest over time rather than by the desire to maximise shortterm self-interest. This definition has a twofold aspect. On the one hand, it links trust not to calculation 
but to a gamble, and, on the other hand, it makes it possible to lighten governance arrangements by 
limiting recourse to mechanisms of supervision, incitement and the threat of violence. Thus, it 
becomes possible to increase the effectiveness of coordination while reducing transaction costs. 
B.2. Social capital: a key notion in understanding the networks 
Social capital appears to be a potentially useful concept in understanding the role played by networks 
and relationships in the informal banking system. By social capital, we mean the value of the 
resources a person has in the form of social relationships within their families and communities. 
Although there is still no consensus regarding its definition, some convergence in analysis can be 
observed. As a general rule, social capital is defined as a collection of networks, norms and values 
that help those concerned achieve common goals. The OECD definition is often cited: ‘networks, 
together with shared norms, values and understandings that facilitate co-operation within or among 
groups’ (OECD, 2001). 
Unlike human capital, which tends to be the property of an individual, social capital is primarily 
analysed as a relational variable. In other words, it is formed in the relationships between individuals, 
groups and communities. It involves family, school, social groups, villages, etc. Social capital is a 
contextual concept: it varies according to the setting in which it arises and grows. The inherent 
difficulties of measuring social capital should be noted, as it is multidimensional, protean and 
relational, and comprises different levels and units of analysis. Essentially, it is tacit and relational in 
nature and cannot easily be measured or codified (Putnam, 2002). 
In our case, it seems that the seminal definition given by Coleman (1990) is more appropriate: ‘I will 
conceive of these social-structural resources as a capital asset for the individual, that is, as social 
capital. Social capital is defined by its function. It is not a single entity, but a variety of different entities 
having two characteristics in common: They all consist of some aspect of a social structure, and they 
facilitate certain actions of individuals who are within the structure’ (Coleman, 1990). According to 
Coleman, social capital has the primary virtue of producing trust, and, as a result, facilitating 
transactions in markets. More generally, social capital and trust improve the ability of individuals to 
work together and act collectively, thus enabling them to significantly increase the income they obtain 
from their activities. 
 
(5) Agency theory can be applied in this type of transaction between a trafficker and a money-laundering specialist: an agency 
relationship links two economic agents, one of whom is the principal and the other the agent. The principal is the individual 
who, in return for payment, mandates the agent to perform a task provided for in a contract. They thus delegate all or part of 
their decision-making power to another individual. The differentiation stems from the asymmetry of information existing between 
the two co-contractors at the time of signature. The agent has privileged information in relation to the principal: elements that 
may influence the outcome of the transaction remain unknown to the principal. This concept of agency has been extended to all 
forms of cooperation between two partners. 

13 
 
The notoriety of an individual who is considered a member of the ‘underworld’ is based on the density 
of their entire social network (the volume and value of their contacts list) and the extent of their 
finances and/or assets. In the world of informal banking, the networks of transmigrants (Tarrius, 2015) 
have enabled them to become important players in money laundering. Their family relationships 
(diaspora), which extend throughout the country, enable the traveller community to find points of 
support for banking. In addition, loyalty within the community and the strength of family ties protect 
them from police scrutiny and competitors. 
Shadow banking is structured on the basis of an interconnection of networks: 
• 
networks of information; 
• 
networks of people; 
• 
financial networks; 
• 
networks of product flows. 
As such, one element plays a central role in this area: the list of contacts, comprising people, both 
professional and non-professional, who can assist, facilitate and organise the collecting of cash. This 
list of contacts can exist in physical form, with names, often coded, written in a notebook or planner, 
or perhaps may simply be memorised by individuals. The extreme diversity of the people on such lists 
indicates the potential extent of the organisation. 
The circulation of information is of key importance. In addition to often being coded, it is retained by 
organisations and feeds the formation of high-quality strategic capital. Within organisations, 
information is disseminated sparingly, enough to give rise to action, but no more, so as to avoid leaks 
and exposure to law enforcement services and competitors. Between organisations, information has a 
price: it is a real asset that can be traded and strategically manipulated. 
Long-established informal bankers have been able to set up protection systems thanks to their strong 
social connections. These systems comprise individuals who are called upon to help in one or more 
operations, thanks to the multiple contacts they have made over the course of their lives. 
According to interviews conducted with OCRGDF investigators, the increasing use of collectors by 
cannabis traffickers became apparent around 2010. Although initially low-key, news of this 
phenomenon gradually spread among the major traffickers because of the reliability of the system, 
which combines both rudimentary methods of cash movement within the national territory (the 
collector collecting the cash from a point located in the trafficking region) and traditional methods of 
transferring the equivalent amount to a bank account (in France or abroad) minus a commission that 
may include exchange fees. The most significant risk to which the trafficker is exposed is the seizure 
of the cash when it is handed over to the collector. Very few examples were given of the possible 
defection of a collector or operators in the money-laundering industry, although delays can sometimes 
occur. In reality, within this chain, one part remains hidden from the trafficker, that is, where 
compensation or risky commercial transactions involving several countries takes place, often 
including Chinese entities. The law enforcement agencies in charge of the fight against money 
laundering highlight the recurrent involvement of Chinese pharmacies, particularly in connection with 
trade and the textile industry, but also the financial sector (banks, branches, savings banks, foreign 
exchange agencies). 
Table 1 compares the costs of money laundering with regard to a number of key countries that 
receive the cash (in physical or virtual form) and are involved in the so-called stacking phase that 
obscures the origin of the funds. These rates relate to the sums of money to be laundered, and a 
wide disparity can be detected, depending not only on the amounts to be laundered (bulk 
discounts exist), the more or less professionalised and reputable channels used but also on the 
risks of tracing, detection, seizure and confiscation of funds. These costs need to be analysed to 
determine whether they relate to money laundering or corruption, for example. 

14 
 
 
Table 1: Average money laundering costs of the collector system 
Average costs of ML 
as a % of money to be 
laundered (commissions) 
Number of 
intermediaries to 
reach the 
broker 
Carriers 
Colombia* 
10–15 % 
3 
Air route 
Morocco* 
5–10 % 
2–3 
Overland route 
Indian 
subcontinent** 
6–10 % 
3–4 
Land and air 
China** 
1–2 % 
3 
Air route 
Australia** 
8 % 
No information 
No information 
United States** 
10–11 % 
No information 
No information 
Notes: * According to interviews conducted with Cuerpo nacional de policía and Guardia civil (Spain), July 2019. 
** According to interviews conducted with Dutch police (KLPD), December 2019. 
 
Carriers generally hold regular jobs that do not attract the attention of the police. While the majority of 
carriers are men between 25 and 45 years old, a small proportion of them are women over 50 years 
old (Cuerpo nacional de policía, Spain). 
B.3. A money-laundering channel that is more opaque and linked to the complex 
finance and trade flows between China and France 
There are two driving forces behind informal exchanges between China and France: 
• 
First, the presence of Chinese workers in France who wish to send part of their income back 
to their country of origin in order to support their family, community or village. Remittances 
use channels that have been in place for a long time, but through which flows have expanded 
in recent years. The migration of Chinese students to Europe also contributes to the 
necessary fluidity of (in)formal financial flows; 
• 
Second, the increase in commercial activities between France and China and the 
establishment of wholesale centres for women's and men's ready-to-wear clothing 
(Aubervilliers, Tremblay-en-France, Marseille). These centres have become places where 
local criminals and traders meet. Moreover, it is still difficult to distinguish between formal and 
informal trade flows or between legal and illegal flows because of the often hybrid and 
composite way goods and capital are channelled. The interweaving, even interdependent and 
complementary nature of the exchanges between the formal and informal trade sectors have 
often been pointed out, both at the level of specific practices and that of actors or sectors 
(Meagher, 2010). 
The aim here is not to participate in the stigmatisation or criminalisation of the commercial activities 
taking place in these centres or the transfer of funds by Chinese workers, but to highlight, in support 
of a number of police cases related to collectors, that gaps in the system allow for the intrusion of 
traffickers and members of the criminal community. In this regard, good practices are being 
exchanged for illicit activity. Chinese merchants are in need of euros (cash) and traffickers offer this 
cash in exchange for an international transaction enabling them to recover the funds in question by 
having them transferred to a bank account, usually abroad. In doing so, the traffickers benefit from 
these resources and are able to reinvest these funds, be it in Europe or in North Africa. 

15 
 
The demand for cash from Chinese traders is also explained by the fact that they act as an exchange 
office for Chinese tourists travelling to Europe (offering more advantageous exchange rates between 
yuan (6) and euros). 
There is an abundance of literature on the place held by remittances: firstly, from a macroeconomic 
point of view, in relation to foreign exchange inflows into the economy of the country of origin; 
secondly, in terms of the dynamism of the local economy; and thirdly, in regard to supporting the 
community and the migrant’s family back home. All indicators tend to show that remittances form a 
major source of development that exceeds comparable official assistance. Already in 2003, El 
Qorchi and colleagues, in an IMF publication, highlighted the diversity of remittance companies. 
They proposed a typology of historical structures, distinguishing between those opting for 
legitimate and illegitimate uses. In their view, we should not make the mistake of assuming that 
illegitimate uses are predominant, quite the opposite in fact (El Qorchi et al., 2003). Remittance 
offices involved in illegal transactions bring the whole business into disrepute. Furthermore, it 
would be strategically inefficient to apply the same regulation to all of them. 
From high-profile investigation cases such as ‘Operation Virus’ and ‘Babel’ it is apparent that Chinese 
products are in demand among Moroccan traders. We know that interdependencies have been built 
up between the two continents, and, obviously, the Chinese are not the only actors responsible for the 
distribution on African soil of goods manufactured in the tens of thousands of factories in Guangdong 
province. ‘More and more Africans are selling goods from China and those who were initially 
employed by the Chinese are setting up their own businesses, benefiting from the know-how and 
networks of their former employers’ (Bredeloup and Bertoncello, 2006). The multiplication of ChinaEurope-Africa relations is conducive to the intrusion of practices that fall within the grey areas of trade 
(over-invoicing, under-invoicing, the circumvention of customs and tax obligations), which themselves 
favour opportunistic behaviour by criminals, from drug traffickers to international fraudsters. 
B.4. Some benchmarks of the Chinese banking system 
China’s banking landscape has been enriched over the years since 1978, which was a key year in the 
reform of the banking and financial system, and heralded the creation of four specialised banks, which 
saw their mandates broaden to become all-encompassing (Aguignier, 2012): 
• 
Bank of China (BoC) for international transactions; 
• 
Agricultural Bank of China (ABC) for rural banking services; 
• 
Construction Bank of China (CBC) for infrastructure financing; 
• 
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) for commercial banking in cities. 
These banks still dominate the Chinese domestic market to this day, with a market share of deposits 
close to 50 %, and they all rank among the 10 largest banks in the world in terms of capital (or market 
capitalisation). They are true leviathans, with thousands of branches and hundreds of thousands of 
employees; but despite this, their presence does not extend beyond the major cities. 
In 1994, the government created a number of development banks, such as the China Development 
Bank and the Agricultural Development Bank of China. There has also been a proliferation of 
institutions such as trust companies (ITICs) (7), operating outside of the control of the banking 
regulator. The system is gradually being modernised, with the establishment of a legal, regulatory and 
technical framework, but governance and the culture of risk control are not keeping pace with this 
development. In the early 2000s, the Chinese authorities strengthened the regulatory system by 
creating the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), the equivalent of the French Autorité de 
 
(6) Yuan or renminbi. 
(7) ITICs: international development and trust companies. 

16 
 
contrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR) (8), including a massive effort to train staff (with support 
from the World Bank). After a series of reforms and consolidation measures, Chinese banks are now 
becoming profitable. 
The Chinese banking system has experienced many crises (the crisis of the 1990s cost around 30 % 
of the country’s GNP). Nevertheless, today it has adopted prudential ratios (a high-quality standard), 
especially compliance with solvency ratios, with regulators and bankers increasingly aware of the risk 
culture. Moreover, it is now equipped with technical and regulatory tools that comply with international 
standards. China is becoming the world’s largest banking sector in terms of asset size. However, 
some of the smaller local banks are encountering problems (too much credit given to state-owned 
enterprises with deteriorating balance sheets), suggesting they are less concerned about financial 
flows from abroad. Shadow banking has also developed to meet the financing needs of the growing 
economy. The Chinese banking system, with small, fragile banks and large, solid banks, has flaws that 
may explain why the regulator is not focused on the nature of funds coming from or transiting through 
the country from abroad. In addition, there are obvious problems in certain peer-to-peer (P2P) 
activities in the country. High levels of enthusiasm for financial innovation and effective lobbying by 
some ‘fintech’ sponsors have allowed major bubbles to develop. Several cases of massive P2P fraud 
(or ‘crowd funding’) have led the authorities to practically ban this activity. Where there were more than 
4 000 operators in 2018, only a few dozen remain today. There are other grey areas, such as 
actors in the trust or leasing company sector that in reality are often merely ‘sock puppets’, designed 
to allow banks to circumvent credit quotas. 
Most Chinese banks are relatively inactive outside China; only the big banks and policy banks are 
active abroad. This leads the diaspora to use a variety of channels, some of which are informal, to 
repatriate their funds to local banks whose cash flow is severely lacking (OCDE, 2019). Today, the 
Chinese digital giants (Alibaba, Tencent, etc.) are increasingly interested in the field of financial 
services. Since they are not banks, they are not subject to banking regulations and offer services in 
direct competition with banks. To close this Chinese loophole — which is important because a 
growing part of the illicit financial flows resulting from drug trafficking in Europe and certain 
international scams ends up in, or transits through, China — the banking regulator, the CBRC, has 
enforcement powers over a range of financial service providers, although it remains under ‘political’ 
influence. 
 
 
 
(8) Not to be confused with the financial intelligence unit, which in France is called Tracfin. 

17 
 
C. The public response: an unequal consideration 
When it comes to drug trafficking, the information collected by law enforcement agents is 
characterised by the nature of their missions and objectives within the broader context of criminal 
policy. Given this caveat, it is necessary to consolidate that information with other types of knowledge 
(government witnesses, interviews with offenders in prison) to achieve a systematised body of 
knowledge regarding the practices and sociological profiles of those involved in money laundering — 
provided the case files kept by the police and security services supply biographical information that 
contributes to a truly heuristic approach. 
A money-laundering typology describes the characteristics that point towards money laundering on 
the basis of experience. This underlying framework is usually created through extensive analysis of 
criminal investigations. Typologies are established by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) at the 
international level, and at the national level by the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). In 2013, the FATF 
produced a report that highlighted the problem of misusing informal banking, entitled ‘The role of 
Hawala and other similar service providers in money laundering and terrorist financing’. The report 
shed light on two often competing and conflicting views on Hawala that still stand: ‘Many countries 
and communities, as well as the development community, view them as essential providers of 
financial services to the unbanked in countries with limited financial access. In significant numbers of 
jurisdictions and sometimes in the same jurisdiction, law enforcement views them as one of the 
leading channels for terrorist financing and money laundering’ (FATF, 2013, p. 9). 
In the fight against money laundering, Europe is viewed as a model and lays the foundations for 
combating the problem on an international scale. Since the early 1990s, legislative tools and human 
and financial resources have continued to improve the systems for dealing with money laundering. 
Many European countries have adopted anti-money laundering standards under the aegis of the 
European Union’s 5th anti-money laundering Directive, while countries’ financial intelligence units play 
an increasingly important role in prevention, detection and deterrence. However, the question of the 
effective application of these standards remains. One of the shortcomings in this area concerns the 
link between law enforcement action and its translation into justice. In some countries, like Spain, 
judges and prosecutors remain concerned about giving precedence to individual liberties and are 
reluctant to support the reversal of the burden of proof. 
C.1. Some European countries are more heavily impacted due to a prevalence of 
criminal activities 
Spain 
In most European countries, in the spirit of the free movement of capital, the transporting of cash is 
allowed up to a limit of EUR10 000. However, in Spain, this threshold is fixed at EUR100 000 within 
the country, well over the amount authorised in other EU countries. This factor, along with a number 
of other reasons, indicates why some organised crime groups choose Spain as a base from which to 
manage their activities. According to Spanish authorities and the European Central Bank, the 
circulation of EUR 500 banknotes was particularly intensive in the region of southern Spain, including 
Andalusia. The EUR 500 banknote, the production of which was stopped in May 2016, is still legal 
tender. 
According to the Spanish National Police (Brigada de Investigación del Blanqueo de Capitales y 
Anticorrupción / Unidad central de delincuencia económica y fiscal), the country occupies a major 
place in the European drug market; indeed, it is one of the main gateways for cocaine and cannabis 
resin (hashish). As a result, Spain records cash shipments to Colombia on the one hand and to 
Morocco, France and Belgium on the other. 

18 
 
The Spanish authorities are currently cooperating with their counterparts in Colombia to better control 
money transfers. They report a modus operandi whereby a bank card or cards are sent to Colombia 
to make withdrawals, thus avoiding the physical movement of cash from one country to another. 
The so-called ‘Rigoler’ case involved smuggling by way of the Chinese industrial sector and cash 
mules to Colombia. Part of the funds collected went to branches of Chinese banks in Bulgaria and 
Hungary. The Servicio Ejecutivo de la Comisión de Prevención del Blanqueo de Capitales e 
Infracciones Monetarias (Sepblac) (the Spanish FIU) points out that requests for information directed 
to China’s financial intelligence unit by the judicial police services of European countries mostly have 
no effect and rarely lead to cooperation. According to the Sepblac officials, if China were to become a 
member of the Egmont Group such exchanges would be facilitated. 
A specialised officer of the Spanish National Police further stated that ‘the growing exchanges 
between Spain and the United Arab Emirates are conducive to the intrusion of criminal funds. The 
investments made by Emiratis in southern Spain in the real estate and trade sectors create 
opportunities for contacts with certain intermediaries working in the legal and illegal spheres. Dubai is 
also an attractive place for criminals, some of whom go so far as to acquire real estate there’. 
Cash transporters active in Spain very often originate from South America (Colombia, Venezuela or 
Peru). The proximity of Portugal also offers opportunities for transit and transfer to Portuguese 
speaking countries (e.g. Brazil, Angola), also taking advantage of existing trade routes. 
According to the Audiencia Nacional magistrates we interviewed, Spain has territories (Ceuta, Melilla, 
the Canary Islands) and strong connections with Gibraltar and Andorra, where banks are the main 
money laundering channel open to traffickers, and few examples were given regarding the issue of 
collectors. On the other hand, the interviews conducted with the Central Operative Unit (UCO) of the 
Guardia Civil revealed an operation carried out over a year and a half in 2013–2014 called ‘Filósofos’ 
(involving the tapping of nearly 30 phones) which followed collectors linked to cocaine trafficking — as 
a result of which several million euros were seized identified. This case led to the arrest of five SyrianLebanese organisers (including a facilitator in Spain and a super-facilitator or ‘broker’ in Venezuela) in 
the Spanish part of an international investigation (covering the Netherlands, Italy, Portugal and 
Venezuela), also conducted with Operation Cassandra of the Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA). The DEA has a high level of expertise because of its knowledge of money-laundering methods 
in the Americas. Indeed, the cases revealed in connection with the ‘black market peso exchange’, 
especially with regard to Colombia and Venezuela, have enabled the US authorities to accumulate 
knowledge that could be useful for Europeans. 
According to the investigators, the cost to the traffickers of this laundering method is estimated at 
between 7 and 14 % (see Table 1) of the sums laundered, including a form of insurance in case of 
loss or theft. They add that there are people who can take custody of the money, for 1 % of the 
amounts involved per day. 
Transactions made by using ‘tokens’ or a method that does not catch the attention of law enforcement 
bodies, for instance the exchange of a serial number on a banknote, are intended to ensure trust 
between parties and facilitate the identification process (with no need to show an official document 
such as an ID card). Contacts are made by telephone with Messaging applications such as Telegram 
and Whatsapp in order to determine various ordinary collection points (public squares, fast-food 
restaurants, car parks, etc.). It would appear that the responsibility for transporting the money lies with 
the carrier. 
Guardia Civil officials spoke of another case that mobilised law enforcement agencies in several 
countries (Spain, Portugal, Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy) and led to the arrest of 38 collectors. At 
this stage, the information gathered is not sufficient to build a model of the phenomenon. 
Italy 
In Italy, although the Guardia di Finanza’s priorities include border checks on passengers, stopping 

19 
 
collectors remains a marginal issue. It is far outweighed by large-scale transnational moneylaundering operations using the ordinary banking system, the productive sectors and offshore centres. 
The Italian Mafias have developed such financial capacities that they have long had financial 
specialists acting as middlemen between the legal world and criminal markets. Nevertheless, the 
Italian authorities monitor the (undeclared) movements of currency in and out of Italy, particularly 
between the peninsula and abroad, notably China. Cash transporters can assess the various risks of 
discovery at particular airports. Guardia di Finanza officials explain that Chinese organisations choose 
which border to cross according to the degree of control in place at a particular time, as evidenced by 
the switching of a number of transporters’ departures from Rome to Milan airport. The Financial 
Intelligence Unit records suspicious reports from the three main money transfer companies (RIA, 
Western Union and Moneygram), in particular it looked at transactions that showed a splitting of 
transfers from Italy to China and the use of forged identity documents. However, the funds involved 
appeared to originate not from drug trafficking but from the textile business. In this respect, there has 
been an increase in transfers from the city of Prato (Tuscany), which specialises in this sector. 
From January to October 2019, the Italian authorities seized cash totalling EUR 10 172 490 at the 
borders (source: Guardia di Finanza, interview, November 2019), the majority of which came from 
people leaving for China. Cash seizures are also being made at the French-Italian borders, but 
according to the same authorities, it remains difficult to determine the origin of these funds. 
Finally, a number of officers referred to the physical movement of cash between Italy and Albania, 
some of which was said to be the result of criminal activities by Albanian groups involved in the 
trafficking of marijuana, cocaine and heroin. 
Other organisations, both Nigerian and Lebanese, were mentioned by the Italian authorities. Nigerian 
groups are mainly active in the area of trafficking human beings, small-scale drug trafficking and 
some forms of cybercrime. These individuals are experienced in the use of the Hawala system, as it is 
also a way of transferring funds of legal origin. 
Ultimately, it appears that in Italy, the issue of drug money collectors is subject to minimal police 
scrutiny given the wide range of money-laundering methods used by the Mafias. 
The Netherlands 
In the Netherlands, three specialised teams are spread out over the territory in order to identify money 
laundering activity, which they know has existed for a long time but which in recent years has 
assumed an unprecedented scale. Once again, a correlation is made between the strengthening of 
controls on the legal banking system and the shift of criminals to alternative and informal remittance 
systems. 
Again, the involvement of certain parts of the Chinese textile trade in the laundering process was 
reported in the Netherlands. Better known as ‘trade-based money laundering’, some traders are 
involved in a highly simplified scheme involving processes of compensation between textile exports 
and the provision of foreign currency (euros, dollars) in the importing country, as well as transfers to 
third countries. 
Moreover, this practice appears to have been extended or at least ‘democratised’: groups of Dutch 
nationals, Latin Americans, Moroccans, Indo-Pakistanis (from the UK), Syrian-Lebanese, Hungarians 
and Turks have been found in the country using this money-laundering technique. It is useful to 
indicate the origins of these groups in order to recall both the cardinal notion of trust and the role of 
the wider field of criminal activity. For example, Turkish groups launder money from heroin trafficking, 
while Latin Americans launder money from cocaine trafficking and Moroccans from hashish 
trafficking. The Dutch police also note that there is an advantageous environment provided by, for 
example, the presence of networks from former Dutch colonies (Suriname, Curaçao and Aruba), while 
their proximity to Venezuela, a rear base for Colombian cocaine trafficking, constitutes an asset for 
traffickers from these territories. In addition, the Netherlands is a synthetic drug production area 

20 
 
connected to the drug markets of several countries; Mexico, the Dominican Republic, Australia and 
Great Britain, to mention a few, regularly import synthetic drugs and the payments for these may 
ultimately be managed by a broker located in a Dutch metropolis. However, law enforcement attention 
is focused more on the outflow of cash from the Netherlands than on its inflow, while the sums 
collected range from EUR 50 000 to EUR 500 000. Gradually, collectors have been entrusted with 
smaller sums in order to reduce losses in the event of theft or seizure by the police. According to one 
of the officers, ‘the facilitator is careful not to build up stocks and works on a just-in-time basis’. The 
use of collectors guarantees a certain degree of anonymity and trust is mediated by an object: the 
serial number of a banknote or a token. 
Dutch police officers claim that Indo-Pakistani people have a long history of using this informal 
financial system, including through the trade in textiles, and the purchase of phones and related 
accessories. Violence is a latent presence in these circles, and grenades and firearms (Kalashnikovs) 
have frequently been discovered. Nonetheless, law enforcement seldom report overt violence in this 
community. 
Among the practices of the collector network, the use of encrypted messaging is widespread. This is 
nothing out of the ordinary when compared with criminal activities that fall within the scope of 
organised crime. The use of multiple telecommunication devices, some of which are used only once, 
is also commonplace. This is reflected in the cost of investigations, which include phone tapping and 
potentially hours of interpreting. Attention was drawn to the implementation of the Anti-Money 
Laundering Act in the Netherlands. Dutch police officers believe in the virtues of intelligence, 
international cooperation and the coordination of specialised anti-money laundering police. For 
example, reference was made to the strengths of the Joint Investigation Teams under the aegis of 
Eurojust and Europol, as demonstrated in a recent case involving the Netherlands, Belgium and 
France (Operation Kouri). There is no doubt that, despite increased knowledge of the collectors' 
modus operandi in recent years, the police are already turning their attention to crypto-money as a 
means of laundering drug money. 
It appears that the attention of the authorities was drawn to this method of collecting cash within an 
informal banking system only through incidental cases, but in view of the apparent scale of the 
phenomenon, it can be assumed that it had been in place for several years. Collectors’ files are taken 
into account and processed on the initiative of specialised police forces. In this respect, it is worth 
noting the role played by the ‘International Anti-Money Laundering Operation Network’ (AMON), an 
international network of informal cooperation dedicated to the fight against laundering, bringing 
together some 40 member countries. 
C.2. Analysis 
A few key points emerge from this survey regarding the public response to this issue: 
• 
It remains difficult to regulate the informal banking system in so far as the obligations that 
apply to the legal banking system are impossible to apply in its case. The benefits are far too 
great for the users of this informal system, suggesting that other resources must be employed 
to curb its use by criminals. This requires working with community representatives in the 
origin and destination countries of the funds, not to prohibit the practices but to push for selfregulation. 
• 
The crucial role of intelligence in this field suggests that this resource must be stressed in the 
training of specialised judicial police, customs and FIU; in the same way, the exchange of 
knowledge between intelligence units could help to identify salient features and recurrences. 
• 
The investigation techniques used in fighting organised crime can be employed in relation to 
the illegal banking system (wiretapping, undercover operations, sound recording, etc.). 

21 
 
• 
Joint Investigation Teams (JITs) can be very productive as they have a number of advantages 
(FATF, 2013): 
− 
no requirement for international mutual legal assistance requests; 
− 
intelligence and evidence sharing between JIT members; 
− 
evidence can be used in court; 
− 
members of the JIT can be present at house searches, interviews of suspects and other 
associated areas of operational activity in all jurisdictions covered; 
− 
funding for the establishment of JITs is available from Eurojust. This funding is available 
for reimbursing the cost of travel, accommodation, translation and interpretation; in 
addition, Eurojust can fund/host operational meetings. 
Conclusion 
The present study is exploratory and should be continued to provide a better understanding of money 
laundering methods that appear outside the legal banking and financial system, which, as some 
investigators point out, remain under the radar of the police and justice services. Knowledge can also 
be shared between specialised law enforcement agencies (including taking advantage of customs 
services’ high degree of involvement in the fight against fraud), in France and internationally. Knowing 
more about these collectors is likely to guide criminal policies, which can then aim to disrupt their 
practices, putting the system of illicit drug supply under pressure and depriving traffickers of the 
income from their activities. 
Criminal networks are unfalteringly imaginative in developing new and innovative methods of 
laundering the proceeds of illicit activity and circumventing legislative and institutional safeguards. 
The laundering of cash from organised crime reveals two constants: a highly controlled collection of 
the proceeds of trafficking and the use of community-based laundering networks. The cash is then 
laundered in three different ways: by transporting it; through converting it into resaleable goods; or by 
using a clearing mechanism. This is a real ‘cash market’ that responds to the law of supply and 
demand, coordinated by a main protagonist, the ‘super-facilitator’ or ‘Saraf’, at the head of an 
international hidden banking system. The actors involved are constantly adapting to changes in 
legislation, customs and police controls, fluctuating exchange rates between currencies and the stock 
market prices of certain raw materials. 
The interviews carried out in France, Spain, Italy and the Netherlands show that the problems posed 
by collectors are unevenly addressed, largely due to security objectives and plans linked to the 
contingencies of domestic criminogenic realities. The French judicial police have mastered some of 
the workings of these money laundering methods and channels, and are pioneers in this field, but 
their investigation strategy rapidly takes on a European and international dimension and thus 
becomes very dependent on international judicial cooperation. In May 2019, the French authorities 
(DCPJ) hosted a seminar in Paris entitled, ‘Cash collectors in money laundering’, to help share 
knowledge and facilitate connections between law enforcement officials. The participation of expert 
researchers, such as Nikos Passas, reminds us of the importance of knowledge transfer in this field of 
study, which remains insufficiently analysed in the social sciences. 
The analytical approach to this method of laundering still leaves large knowledge gaps, both 
qualitative and quantitative (with statistical data being scarce and scattered). This paper highlights the 
skills required of collectors (discretion, mobility, the ability to use encrypted telecommunications, 
counting, etc.) and stresses the key role played by ‘Sarafs’ as informal bankers in the financial 
clearing mechanism. The traditional system of Hawala is based on a fundamental criterion — trust. 

22 
 
Tracing the movements of laundered funds makes it necessary to include China in the analysis since 
many money-laundering cases tend to highlight the country’s major role in international financial 
exchanges when it comes to concealing the origin of funds and recovering them through accounts 
located in third countries. The controls carried out by the Chinese financial unit fall short of the 
expectations set by international standards. 
Future research should focus on the role of the United Arab Emirates, particularly Dubai, and other 
Persian Gulf countries. Dubai has become a financial and economic centre that plays a pivotal role in 
laundering schemes operating between China, the Indian subcontinent, Europe and North Africa. This 
is an area that requires in-depth analysis as a matter of urgency. 
 
 

23 
 
Bibliography 
Aguignier, P. (2012), ‘Four Chinese banks among top 10 banks worldwide. Illusion or reality?’, in 
Cabestan, J-P., Di Meglio, J-F. and Richet, X. (eds.), China and the global financial crisis: a comparison 
with Europe, Routledge Studies on the Chinese Economy, Routledge, Abingdon. 
Ben Lakhdar, C. (2013), ‘Eléments sur le trafic de cannabis’, in Julienne, M. (ed.), Le cannabis ? 
Comprendre vite et mieux. Éditions Belin, Paris. 
Ben Lakhdar, C., Lalam, N. and Weinberger, D. (2015), ‘L’évaluation de l’argent de la drogue en 
France en 2010’, rapport pour la Mission interministérielle de lutte contre la drogue et la toxicomanie, 
INHESJ. 
Ben Lakhdar, C., Lalam, N. and Weinberger, D. (2016), Estimation des marchés des drogues illicites en 
France, MILDECA-INHESJ. 
Bredeloup, S. and Bertoncello, B. (2006), ‘La migration chinoise en Afrique: accélérateur du 
développement ou “sanglot de l’homme noir”?’, Afrique Contemporaine, 2(218), pp. 199–224. 
Coleman J. (1990), Foundations of social theory, Harvard University Press, Cambridge. 
El Qorchi, M., Maimbo, S.M. and Wilson, J.F. (2003), Informal funds transfer systems: an analysis of the 
informal hawala system, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C. 
FATF (2013), The role of Hawala and other similar service providers in money laundering and terrorist 
financing, OECD, Paris. 
Grellet, G. and Grellet, N. (1999), ‘Développement des marchés et coûts de transaction : une critique 
des politiques économiques libérales’, Revue Tiers Monde XI, p. 157, janvier–mars. 
Meagher, K. (2010), Identity economics: social networks & the informal economy in Nigeria, James 
Currey, Oxford. 
OCDE (2019), Etude économique de l’OCDE : Chine, OCDE, Paris. 
OECD (2001), The well-being of nations: the role of human and social capital, education and skills, 
OECD Centre for Educational Research and Innovation, Paris. 
Passas, N. (2003), ‘Hawala and other informal value transfer systems: how to regulate them?’, Risk 
Management, 5(2), pp. 49–59. 
Passas, N. (2005), Informal value transfer systems, terrorism and money laundering, US Department 
of Justice, January. 
Poisson, V. and Gao, Y. (2005), Le trafic et l’exploitation des immigrants chinois en France, Bureau 
International du Travail, Genève, mars. 
Putnam, R. (ed.) (2002), Democracies in flux: the evolution of social capital in contemporary societies, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Reuter, P. and Soudijn, M. (2016), ‘Cash and carry: the high cost of currency smuggling in the drug 
trade’, Crime, Law and Social Change, 66(3), pp. 271–290. 
Spilka, S. and Legleye, S. (2020), ‘Chiffre d’affaires du cannabis en 2017. Une nouvelle estimation 
directe par la dépense’, Tendances, OFDT, n°137. 
Tarrius, A. (2002), La mondialisation par le bas. Les nouveaux nomades de l’économie souterraine, 
Balland, Paris. 
Tarrius, A. (2015), La mondialisation criminelle, Éditions de L’Aube, La Tour d’Aigues. 

24 
 
Annex 1: Interview guide — questionnaire 
The socio-demographic profile of the actors 
 
Age, socio-professional category, gender, degree, nationality, criminal record ... 
 
The rationality of the collector (inscribed in a family, clan, community logic) 
 
Gains and risks related to the activity 
 
Use of earnings 
 
Input and output processes in the collector activity 
 
The skills mobilised (knowing how to circulate, how to use basic accounting methods) 
The organisation and operation of the collectors 
 
The different segments and their connections: the collector, the facilitator, super-facilitator 
 
The contract, the place of the spoken word in dispute management 
 
The role of trust 
 
Defections 
 
Violence and/or the threat of violence (settling of scores?) 
 
Costs and profits 
 
The relay points 
 
The articulation between the informal system and legal financial structures 
 
How are the logistics activities related to the laundering process financed? 
 
What are the proceeds of the laundering, what are they spent on? 
 
Which criminal activities make most use of collectors? 
 
What are the insurance mechanisms? Who is responsible in case of loss, seizure, theft of 
cash? 
 
Reputation and publicity? 
 
The use of new technologies (encrypted messaging, social networks, etc.) 
The public response 
 
What is the reality of considering the collectors by all services? 
 
The action of law enforcement structures police — justice ... 
 
State of the domestic anti-money laundering legislation 
 
What are the main obstacles to apply this legislation? 
 
Importance of money laundering penalties in the scale of offences 
 
Operational and legal means granted to law enforcement services in charge of the fight 
against money laundering. 
 
Are there any plans for legislative changes aimed at strengthening the procedural means of 
investigators? 
 
How to fight against this modus operandi without prejudice to the remittances? 
 
Do informal police networks such as AMON help to improve information exchange and 
cooperation?