EU Drug Markets
Analysis 2024
Key insights for policy and practice

Legal notice
Neither the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA), Europol nor 
any person acting on behalf of the EMCDDA or Europol is responsible for the use that might be 
made of the following information.
More information on the European Union is available on the internet (https://europa.eu).
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2024
PDF 
ISBN 978-92-9497-961-2 
doi:10.2810/137611 
TD-05-23-510-EN-N
PRINT 
ISBN 978-92-9497-960-5 
doi:10.2810/34465 
TD-05-23-510-EN-C
HTML 
ISBN 978-92-9497-965-0 
doi:10.2810/567901 
TD-05-23-510-EN-Q
© Europol, 2024
The Hague, the Netherlands 
Publications: https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications-events
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
For any use or reproduction of photos or other material that is not under the EMCDDA or 
Europol copyright, permission must be sought directly from the copyright holders.
Photo credits: ©iStock.com, apart from:
Page 18-19: © GulArt/ Adobestock, 2024 (image created using Adobe Firefly)
Page 27: © Rita Jorge
Page 28: © Swedish Customs Laboratory
Page 37: © Adobe stock/Urupong
 
Recommended citation: 
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction and Europol (2024), EU Drug 
Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice, Publications Office of the European 
Union, Luxembourg.
© European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction, 2024
Praça Europa 1, Cais do Sodré, 1249-289 Lisbon, Portugal
Tel. + 351 211210200
info@emcdda.europa.eu | www.emcdda.europa.eu 

Contents
Foreword 
 
4
Understanding the multifaceted drug market 
in a globalised world 
 
6
Current landscape and key threats 
 
9
EU drug market : significant financial impact 
 10
High availability and product diversification : increasing risks for users 
 12
Higher trafficking efficiency : intensifying pressure on Europe’s logistics hubs 
 12
Europe takes a central position in drug production and trafficking 
 14
Criminal adaptability : a major challenge for law enforcement 
 14
Drug markets : resilient to major external shocks 
 15
Interplay between licit and illicit markets: adding a layer of complexity 
 16
Extreme violence: putting a strain on local communities and society 
 17
Corruption: facilitating drug trafficking and undermining the rule of law 
 17
Technology and innovation: key drivers of drug markets 
 17
Key developments by drug 
 19
Cannabis 
 20
Cocaine 
 21
Heroin and other opioids 
 22
Amphetamine 
 23
Methamphetamine 
 24
MDMA 
 26
New psychoactive substances 
 28
Actions to address current threats and increase 
preparedness 
 31
Improve the intelligence picture: detection, monitoring and analysis 
32
Strengthen responses to reduce supply and enhance security 
32
Strengthen international cooperation 
34
Invest in capacity-building 
35
Strengthen policy, public health and safety responses 
35
Towards a coherent approach 
 36

4
Foreword
The market for illicit drugs, controlled by criminal 
networks, represents a serious security threat to 
the European Union. It endangers public health 
and safety while fostering extreme violence and 
corruption, undermining the very fabric of society, 
democracy and the rule of law. The increasing diversity 
and complexity of EU drug markets also presents new 
challenges, requiring a comprehensive European drug 
alert system to improve responses and prevent the 
situation from escalating.
One critical aspect of the threat from drug markets 
lies in the exploitation of key logistical infrastructure, 
particularly seaports. Criminal networks infiltrate these 
hubs of trade and transportation, turning them into 
conduits for unprecedented drug flows. The economic 
and social repercussions of these developments pose 
urgent challenges, escalating the security threat and 
further increasing the availability of illicit drugs in Europe. 
The European Union therefore needs to strengthen the 
resilience of these and other logistics hubs to prevent 
their further exploitation for illicit drug trafficking.
The recruitment of young people by criminal 
networks involved in drug markets compounds 
this crisis. Vulnerable youth are lured or forced to 
partake in dangerous and illicit activities by criminal 
organisations. This jeopardises their future opportunities 
and perpetuates a cycle of crime and 
violence, highlighting the need for a strong focus on 
prevention.
Disrupting these criminal networks poses a complex 
challenge, as they constantly adapt to external shocks 
and increasingly use specialist criminal service providers. 
Given the globalised nature of these networks, aided 
by technological developments, they also increasingly 
coordinate their illicit drug trafficking activities from 
outside the European Union. This underlines the 
crucial role of international cooperation in disrupting 
criminal supply routes and networks. While arrests 
of key individuals remain important, it is vital to 
increase law enforcement and judicial authorities’ 
capabilities to dismantle whole criminal networks, 
particularly in cooperation with international partners.

5
The EU Drugs Strategy and its Action Plan and the 
Security Union Strategy equip the European Union 
with the tools to tackle this evolving threat landscape 
and support Member States in fostering security for 
all residents of the European Union. These initiatives are 
augmented by the EU Roadmap to fight drug trafficking 
and organised crime. The successful launch of the 
European Ports Alliance on 24 January 2024 is 
a significant step in its implementation. In addition, 
the Commission has conducted a Schengen thematic 
evaluation focusing on drugs trafficking that identified 
best practices in the area of police cooperation, 
protection of external borders and management 
of IT systems.
The EMCDDA and Europol play a central role 
in these endeavours, supporting Member States 
and cooperating with third countries to strengthen 
Europe’s preparedness and response to illicit drug flows. 
These strategic insights from the two agencies’ joint 
drug markets analysis provide a robust framework for 
understanding and responding to drug markets 
at EU and international level.
Ylva Johansson
European Commissioner 
Migration and Home Affairs

6
Introduction
Understanding 
the multifaceted drug 
market in a globalised 
world
The illicit drugs trade continues to dominate serious 
and organised crime in the European Union, in terms 
of the number of criminals involved and the vast profits 
generated. This market is part of a complex global 
criminal enterprise, with cross-border collaboration 
through facilitators and brokers creating a fluid and 
networked environment.
Globalisation continues to have a significant impact 
as criminals exploit the opportunities provided by 
interconnected networks of communication, trade and 
transport for criminal cooperation and integration along 
supply chains. These developments have influenced 
links between the illicit drugs trade and other crime 
areas in the European Union, such as the trafficking in 
firearms, as drug trafficking networks require a range of 
tools and capacities to facilitate their activities.
The European drug market has seen an unprecedented 
increase in the availability of illicit drugs, evidenced by 
elevated drug purity and stable prices at retail level, 
as well as a diversification of drugs and consumer 
products. This situation is also driven by sustained 
high levels of demand and criminal innovation, 
as illicit drug markets have become highly resilient 
and adaptable in the face of unexpected global events.
The EU drug market has wide-ranging impacts on our 
society, evident in drug-related deaths and the number 
of people seeking treatment. It also fuels the expansion 
of organised crime, increased levels of corruption and 
the exploitation of vulnerable individuals. Much of the 
violence associated with serious and organised crime 
in Europe is related to the drug trade. Meanwhile, illicit 
drug production leads to environmental damage, while 
the economy and the rule of law are undermined by the 
exploitation of legal businesses.

7
The constantly evolving and multifaceted drug market 
demands a multi-pronged approach, involving law 
enforcement, public health, education and international 
cooperation. Recognising the global interconnectedness 
of markets and criminal actors is crucial to developing 
effective responses to address current and future 
threats, as developments in other parts of the world 
will continue to influence the EU drug markets.
These complexities underscore the need for robust 
responses, as brought forward in the new EU Roadmap 
to tackle drug trafficking and organised crime. Priority 
areas include reducing supply by disrupting high-risk 
criminal networks and the key brokers and facilitators, 
such as money launderers, on which they rely, while 
simultaneously improving access to evidence-based 
harm reduction, treatment and rehabilitation measures. 
Ultimately, we need to strengthen social resilience 
in the European Union and address the underlying 
socioeconomic factors that contribute to the harms 
and act as drivers of the illicit drug market.
Alexis Goosdeel
Director, EMCDDA
Catherine De Bolle
Executive Director, Europol

01
Current landscape 
and key threats
This section presents key insights from the current 
analysis of EU drug markets, covering the range 
of market dynamics, geopolitical factors, criminal 
operations and socioeconomic consequences. 
The latest data and analysis show a large, complex 
and constantly evolving EU drug market (Figure 1). 

10
EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
EU drug market : 
significant financial 
impact
Based on 2021 data, the EU drug market is estimated 
to have a minimum retail value of at least EUR 31 billion. 
It is a major income source for organised crime. A key 
feature of this market is the interconnectedness 
between different illicit drugs, with criminal networks 
and key brokers and facilitators often engaging 
in poly-drug criminality. The large EU drug market 
also intersects with, and has a significant impact on 
other crime areas, such as the trafficking in firearms 
and money laundering. 
FIGURE 1 
EU drug markets ecosystem
€31 bn
€0.6 bn 
2 %
Ecstasy/
MDMA
€1.6 bn
Amphetamines 5 %
€12.1 bn 
39 %
Cannabis
€11.6 bn 
37 %
Cocaine
€5.2 bn
Heroin
17 %

11
Current landscape and key threats
IMPACTS
AND CONSEQUENCES
• Wider criminal activity and terrorism
• Societal impact, including violence
• Impact on the legal economy
• Corruption and strain on institutions
DRIVERS 
AND FACILITATORS
• Globalisation and geopolitical challenges
• Technology and innovation
• Criminal tools, including firearms
POLICIES 
AND RESPONSES
• Initiatives
• Structures
• Actions
• Legislation
• Directives
• Frameworks

12
EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
High availability 
and product 
diversification : 
increasing risks 
for users
Availability remains high across the main drugs used 
in Europe, evidenced by the large and in some cases 
increasing quantities that continue to be seized in the 
European Union (Figure 2). In addition, the market for 
illicit drugs is characterised by the diversification of 
consumer products and the widespread availability 
of a broader range of drugs, including new psychoactive 
substances, often of high potency or purity. Specialised 
equipment may be required to meet the detection and 
monitoring challenges posed by this diversification. The 
recent emergence of highly potent opioids, particularly 
benzimidazoles (nitazenes), poses a particularly complex 
threat to public health due to their increased risk of 
life-threatening poisoning. The potential emergence 
of new patterns of consumption in Europe is also a key 
threat, due to the availability of cheap and highly potent 
or pure drugs. This is particularly the case for cocaine, 
which has seen unprecedented levels of availability.
Higher trafficking 
efficiency : 
intensifying 
pressure on 
Europe’s logistics 
hubs 
A major contributing factor to increasing efficiency 
is the trend towards trafficking larger individual 
consignments of drugs by sea, exploiting containers 
flowing through global logistics hubs. As a result, 
over the last ten years, the quantity of drugs seized 
in the European Union has increased considerably 
while the number of seizures across most drug types 
has decreased (Figure 2). The decrease in the number 
of seizures may partly be explained by a reduced focus 
and de-prioritisation of enforcement of drug possession 
and use offences in some Member States. 

13
Current landscape and key threats
FIGURE 2
Percent change in drug seizures in the European Union 
over the last decade 
100
200
300
400
500
Amphetamine
Cannabis resin
Heroin
Methamphetamine
Cannabis herb
Cocaine
0
-100
%
Quantity seized
Number of seizures

14
EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
Europe takes a 
central position 
in drug production 
and trafficking
Industrial-scale production of cannabis and synthetic 
drugs, such as amphetamine, methamphetamine, 
MDMA and cathinones, takes place in the EU for 
both domestic and international markets. The scale 
and complexity of synthetic drug production in Europe 
is driven by innovation in methods and equipment, 
and the availability of the key chemicals needed. 
Large-scale cocaine processing also now takes 
place inside the European Union. Europe is also 
likely an important transit zone for global drug flows, 
particularly cocaine from Latin America and to a lesser 
extent amphetamine in the form of captagon tablets 
from Syria and Lebanon.
Criminal 
adaptability : 
a major challenge 
for law 
enforcement
A diverse range of criminal networks operate in the EU 
drug market. These networks demonstrate a high level of 
adaptability, capitalising on technological advancements 
and broader societal changes, exploiting legal business 
structures and taking advantage of opportunities in the 
traditional and digital economies. Criminals often 
rely on other networks or brokers to facilitate their 
illicit activities. This also gives them the flexibility to 
diversify sources and products, trafficking routes and 
concealment methods – enhancing their efficiency 
and adaptability to minimise risks and maximise profits.

15
Current landscape and key threats
Drug markets : 
resilient to major 
external shocks
The EU drug market has shown remarkable resilience 
to global crises, instability and significant political 
and economic changes. Recent examples of such 
shocks include the COVID-19 pandemic, Russia’s war 
on Ukraine and the Taliban’s rise to power in Afghanistan. 
In response, criminal networks have adapted, changing 
trafficking routes and diversifying their methods.
Simultaneously, these developments have also 
influenced the emergence of new markets and in some 
cases appear to have changed consumer preferences. 

16
EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
Interplay between 
licit and illicit 
markets: adding a 
layer of complexity
Illicit drug markets and the regular economy intersect 
in numerous and significant ways. For example, criminals 
exploit the commercial transport infrastructure to traffic 
drugs and they use loopholes in legislation to access 
chemicals for illicit drug production. These intersections 
are also visible on the cannabis and opioid markets, 
where some products legally available for medicinal 
or industrial purposes may be diverted. For example, 
legal industrial hemp cultivation and CBD (cannabidiol) 
production may be exploited for the manufacture of 
unauthorised cannabis products.

17
Current landscape and key threats
Extreme violence: 
putting a strain on 
local communities 
and society
Some EU Member States are experiencing 
unprecedented levels of drug market-related 
violence, often related to the cocaine and cannabis 
markets. This appears to be concentrated in distribution 
hubs and in competitive retail markets. Such violence 
includes killings, torture, kidnappings and intimidation, 
and often takes place between criminal networks, 
although innocent people are also victims. This has a 
severe impact on society as a whole, increasing the 
perception of public insecurity.
Corruption: 
facilitating drug 
trafficking and 
undermining 
the rule of law
Criminal networks rely on corruption across all levels 
of the drug market to facilitate their activities and 
mitigate risks, including those posed by the criminal 
justice system. Drug-related corruption also targets 
individuals with access to key infrastructure, such as 
those working in logistics hubs, the legal profession 
and the financial sector. Corruption, which is often 
linked to violence, has a corrosive effect on the fabric 
of society and undermines governance, creating 
systemic vulnerabilities and sometimes coercively 
involving people in criminal activity.
Technology 
and innovation: 
key drivers of 
drug markets
Innovation in illicit drug production results in higher 
outputs, increased potency or purity, and a broader 
range of consumer products. Criminal networks 
continue to introduce novel chemicals to produce 
synthetic drugs, posing complex challenges for law 
enforcement. Innovation in the chemical concealment 
of drugs also significantly complicates detection and 
interdiction. Simultaneously, criminal networks leverage 
digital advances and technological opportunities to 
conceal illicit communication, improve drug distribution 
models and reduce risk. An example of this is the recent 
rise in the use of social media and instant messaging 
applications for the retail sale of drugs, making a wide 
range of substances more accessible.

02
Key developments 
by drug

EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
20
Cannabis
Cannabis is the most commonly used illicit drug in the 
European Union, with an estimated 22.6 million adults 
having used it within the last year, and it remains the 
largest drug market in the European Union.
In 2021, cannabis seizures in the European Union 
reached record levels, with 256 tonnes of herbal 
cannabis and 816 tonnes of resin seized. Criminal 
networks operating in the illicit cannabis market are 
diverse and adaptable, often involved in trafficking 
multiple drug types and associated with violence, 
corruption and misuse of legal business structures. 
A large share of the violence between criminals 
in recent years has been linked to the cannabis 
market, in part because of the diversity and 
profitability of the market.
Most herbal cannabis consumed in the European 
Union appears to be produced here, particularly 
in Spain where large-scale cannabis cultivation sites 
have been dismantled. The Western Balkan region 
also plays a role in herbal cannabis supply, while 
Morocco remains the largest cannabis resin supplier. 
However, there are signals of increasing resin production 
in the European Union, and although the quantity is likely 
to be small compared to that of Morocco, this represents 
an emerging threat. Cannabis production carries 
a significant environmental impact due to energy 
and water usage, as well as chemical pollution.
Cannabis potency has surged over the last decade 
for both herbal cannabis and resin, and an increasing 
diversity of consumer products has been observed. 
These include oils, extracts, edibles and vaping products, 
trafficked from North America and produced within 
Europe. Both synthetic and semi-synthetic cannabinoids 
also continue to emerge in various forms of consumer 
products.
The ongoing policy debate around cannabis, 
globally and within the European Union, has led to 
a complex and constantly evolving legal and regulatory 
landscape. This has resulted in considerable national 
and sometimes local heterogeneity, potentially creating 
additional challenges for law enforcement and criminal 
justice systems.

Key developments by drug
21
Cocaine
Cocaine is the second most commonly used illicit 
drug in European Union and the second largest illicit 
drug market by revenue generated. The consumer 
market for cocaine is on the rise, potentially influenced 
by the unprecedented availability of low-cost, high-purity 
cocaine. There are also signals of a potential shift in 
Europe’s role in the global cocaine trade. This can be 
seen in the increasing use of the European Union as a 
transit point for cocaine shipments to other regions and 
the growing trend for some stages of cocaine production 
to take place within the European Union.
Evidence indicates that Latin American and European 
criminal networks collaborate in cocaine production in 
the European Union. This involves the (rarely detected)
smuggling of large quantities of coca paste and cocaine 
base to Europe for further processing into cocaine 
hydrochloride. Importation of cocaine base to the 
European Union also heightens the risk of new 
smokeable cocaine products (e.g. crack cocaine) gaining 
more prominence in European consumer markets.
Record quantities of cocaine have been seized in the 
European Union yearly since 2017, with 303 tonnes 
seized by Member States in 2021. Belgium, the 
Netherlands and Spain report the highest volumes 
of seizures, reflecting their importance as entry points 
for cocaine. Preliminary data indicate that seizures 
increased further in 2022, including in key entry 
points such as Antwerp.
Large quantities of cocaine are trafficked through 
Europe’s seaports in intermodal shipping containers. 
This has led to an unprecedented availability of cocaine 
in the European Union. Corruption and intimidation of 
port workers are key enablers of cocaine smuggling, 
although corruption related to this market extends to 
other sectors of society.
High-risk criminal networks dominate the cocaine trade 
in the European Union, generating significant profits. 
As with other drugs, these networks are enabled by 
facilitators and brokers in a fluid and interconnected 
environment. Serious violence related to the cocaine 
market appears to be increasing in key entry points, 
although it affects society as a whole. 

EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
22
Heroin and 
other opioids
Heroin continues to be the most commonly used illicit 
opioid and is a significant contributor to the harms of 
illicit drug use in the European Union. However, the 
landscape of Europe’s opioid problem is evolving and 
growing in complexity, influenced by developments 
globally, with implications for preparedness and 
response.
Importantly, political changes in Afghanistan, the main 
source of the heroin consumed in Europe, are expected 
to disrupt this market. The Taliban’s announced drug 
ban in April 2022 appears to have taken effect as 
available data suggest a significant reduction in opium 
poppy cultivation and heroin production in 2023. This 
may precipitate a decrease in heroin availability in the 
European Union that could lead to market gaps being 
filled by other drugs, including potent synthetic opioids, 
with significant negative impact on public health and 
security.
Heroin trafficking to the European Union increasingly 
relies on maritime routes and in particular the use of 
global container traffic and ferries departing from 
Türkiye. These methods allow large quantities of 
heroin to be smuggled in single shipments, since 
the use of transhipment points conceals the origin 
and nature of suspicious consignments.
Turkish criminal networks continue to dominate 
the wholesale trafficking of heroin to the European 
market, although other networks, such as those linked 
to the Western Balkan region, are also active in heroin 
trafficking. These networks cooperate with suppliers 
in the main production region and with partners in key 
distribution hubs in the European Union, aided by the 
exploitation of legally established, acquired or infiltrated 
companies along the trafficking routes. Trafficking of 
acetic anhydride, the main chemical required for heroin 
production, from the European Union also continues 
to take place on the ‘reverse Balkan route’ via Türkiye. 
However, the apparent recent reduction in heroin 
trafficking on the Balkan route may lead to changes 
in the future.

Key developments by drug
23
Amphetamine
The European Union is an important market globally 
for amphetamine, with about 90 tonnes of the drug 
consumed in 2021. It is a relatively inexpensive 
stimulant with a large stable market in the European 
Union. While amphetamine is generally low in price and 
purity, high-purity and low-cost amphetamine is found 
in Belgium and the Netherlands – the main production 
centres. Some amphetamine production also occurs in 
Germany and Poland, and occasionally elsewhere.
Criminal networks continually adapt and improve 
amphetamine production methods. The supply of 
precursors and essential chemicals plays a crucial role 
in this, although the criminal infrastructure involved 
remains largely an intelligence gap. The main 
amphetamine production method uses BMK 
as a starting material, which is mainly obtained 
from designer precursors. However, other methods 
may become more prominent in future, potentially 
circumventing the reliance on BMK. The environmental 
impact of amphetamine production is considerable due 
to the large amounts of chemical waste generated.
Amphetamine trafficking within the European Union 
mainly occurs over land, and sometimes in conjunction 
with other drugs. Smaller quantities are trafficked 
through postal and parcel services, often linked to the 
online trade. Trafficking of amphetamine oil from the 
Netherlands and Belgium to other EU countries, where 
it is further processed into consumable amphetamine 
sulfate, is an important part of the illicit amphetamine 
trafficking business in the European Union and has 
grown over the years.
Large shipments of captagon tablets containing 
amphetamine are also trafficked through EU ports, 
from production centres in Syria and Lebanon, to the 
Arabian Peninsula, the main global consumer market. 
However, some captagon production also occurs in the 
European Union, mainly in the Netherlands, for export 
to the large consumer markets. This production appears 
to be opportunistic and based on specific requests or 
demand.

EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
24
Methamphetamine
The methamphetamine market in the European Union, 
although relatively small globally, may be growing. The 
average purity of methamphetamine has increased 
over the past decade, particularly since 2019 when 
large-scale European crystal methamphetamine 
production became more common. Over the same 
period, prices have fallen slightly. While large-scale 
manufacturing and trafficking in the European Union 
appears to be mainly destined for export, there is a 
risk that at least some will spill over to the EU user 
markets, raising the potential for the spread of 
methamphetamine, including smokable crystal 
methamphetamine, to a wider user group.
Industrial-scale methamphetamine production 
occurs in the Netherlands and, to a lesser extent, 
Belgium. Innovations in European methamphetamine 
production have increased efficiency and output. 
As with other synthetic drugs, challenges persist in 
controlling precursor availability as criminal networks 
adapt to legislation. Methamphetamine production in 
the European Union carries significant health, safety and 
environmental risks, for example due to chemical waste.
Large-scale methamphetamine production in the 
European Union was driven by the collaboration 
between European synthetic drug producers and 
Mexican criminal networks. Dutch and Mexican 
knowledge exchange in particular has led to more 
sophisticated and larger methamphetamine production 
facilities. While large-scale production continues, 
Mexican producers are not frequently found in the 
laboratories, as European producers have learned the 
techniques. This collaboration, however, has set an 
important precedent with a potential significant risk to 
public health and safety, as Mexican criminal networks 
are known to produce illicit fentanyl for the US market.

Key developments by drug
25
Methamphetamine seizures in the European Union 
have significantly increased in recent years, attributed 
to both domestic production and trafficking from 
non-EU countries like Iran, Mexico and Nigeria. 
Methamphetamine production in Afghanistan 
also poses a threat, due to potential trafficking to 
the European Union through established heroin routes. 
Increasing levels of seizures noted in Türkiye may be 
a sign of such a development.

EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
26
 MDMA
MDMA remains a popular drug used in the European 
Union that is generally associated with episodic patterns 
of consumption in nightlife and entertainment settings. 
While current data suggest an overall relatively stable 
situation in respect to MDMA use, there are considerable 
differences at national level.
Europe is a large-scale producer of MDMA, with the 
domestic consumer market supplied by European 
producers. Similar to the production of other 
synthetic drugs in Europe, MDMA production 
is largely concentrated in, or around, the Netherlands. 
Large quantities of MDMA produced in Europe are also 
exported to markets outside the European Union, 
including Australia and the Americas.
As is the case with other synthetic drugs, MDMA 
producers often adapt their use of chemicals and 
precursors in order to avoid controls. Another 
development is the apparent increase in reports of 
accidents in MDMA production facilities, including fires 
and explosions, potentially due to the use of inadequate 
equipment and involvement of inexperienced producers. 
In common with other synthetic drugs, MDMA production 
also causes significant environmental damage due to the 
amount of chemical waste produced.
The overall strength of MDMA tablets and powders 
available on the retail market remains high by historical 
standards, although in some key countries there appears 
to be a downward trend. Nevertheless, the continued 
availability of high-dose MDMA tablets is of particular 
concern. Another threat is the recent emergence of novel 
MDMA consumer products, such as edibles and liquids, 
which may attract new consumer groups.

Key developments by drug
27
The adulteration of MDMA with other harmful 
substances also remains an ongoing issue, with 
potentially severe public health consequences. While 
adulterants are commonly found in MDMA tablets and 
powders, there have been incidents of adulteration with 
new psychoactive substances, particularly cathinones. 
It also appears that ‘pink cocaine’ or ‘tucibi’, a mixture of 
MDMA with ketamine, cocaine or 2C-B first reported in 
Latin American countries, is emerging on the European 
market. Taken together, these developments show that 
the European MDMA market is dynamic and resilient.

EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
28
New psychoactive 
substances
The trade in new psychoactive substances (NPS) 
represents a significant and dynamic challenge to the EU 
drug market, as these substances constantly change to 
evade legal restrictions. In 2022, a record 30.6 tonnes of 
new psychoactive substances was seized in Europe, due 
to a relatively small number of large seizures.
While the overall number of new psychoactive 
substances appearing for the first time in Europe 
has declined in recent years, the market remains 
dynamic, with hundreds of substances detected 
and monitored each year by the EU Early Warning 
System. The exploitation of variations in national drug 
control laws allows some new psychoactive substances 
to re-emerge after extended periods of absence.
Digitalisation has played a large role in facilitating the 
sale and distribution of new psychoactive substances. 
The online availability of these substances poses 
regulatory challenges, highlighting the need for 
effective measures to monitor and control online sales.
New psychoactive substances are predominantly 
shipped to the European Union from outside Europe. 
While China continues to be a major supplier, control 
measures on certain synthetic substances (such as 
cathinones, cannabinoids and opioids) appear to have 
prompted a proportion of NPS production to shift to 
India – which has emerged as a major source, 
probably due to limited domestic controls.
In Europe, some synthetic cathinone production is 
also observed, particularly bulk quantities of 3-CMC 
and 4-CMC. The possibility of production of other 
substances remains a threat, particularly as few 
precursors of new psychoactive substances are 
currently controlled.
Large-scale European cathinone seizures, involving 
bulk imports from India, are intercepted mainly by the 
Netherlands and Spain for apparent distribution across 
Europe. There is also an increasing trend in the supply of 
psychoactive pharmaceutical ingredients in bulk powder 
form to the European Union, suspected to originate 
from chemical and pharmaceutical companies outside 
Europe.

Key developments by drug
29
Since 2022, semi-synthetic cannabinoids have 
been sold openly in Europe as ‘legal’ replacements 
for cannabis and delta-9-THC. They are made from 
naturally occurring cannabinoids, such as cannabidiol 
that is extracted from low-THC cannabis (hemp). Bulk 
quantities have been imported from the United States, 
but they are also produced in Europe. They are sold as 
vapes, edibles and other sophisticated products that 
may be attractive to young people.
There are signs that new synthetic opioids, such as 
the nitazenes, are more available in parts of Europe. 
The mis-selling or adulteration of established opioids 
with these potent substances may also be increasing. 
This increases the risk of overdose and can cause 
outbreaks. These changes are likely driven by supply 
side factors, including possible heroin supply disruptions.
Recently, mixtures of new opioids with 
benzodiazepines (‘benzo-dope’) or the animal sedative 
xylazine (‘tranq-dope’) have been reported in Europe. 
First seen in North America, the mixtures are linked to 
increased harms, including risk of overdose.
Harms associated with new psychoactive substances 
remain a significant concern, particularly in relation to 
acute poisonings. Providing effective harm reduction 
measures remains a complex challenge, given the 
diverse and continually evolving nature of these 
substances, and the fact that consumers may be 
unaware of the specific new psychoactive substances 
they are using, as they may be mis-sold as other drugs 
or used as adulterants.

03
Actions to address 
current threats and 
increase preparedness
Monitoring and responding to the multiple threats 
that are posed by the EU drug market requires 
a multidisciplinary, flexible and future-oriented 
approach – mitigating harms and seizing 
opportunities for positive change. This section 
outlines the key areas that need to be addressed 
in order to respond effectively to current and 
future threats arising from EU drug markets.

EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
32
Improve the 
intelligence 
picture: detection, 
monitoring and 
analysis
Strengthen the systematic monitoring and analysis 
of the EU drug market, including precursors, illicit 
drugs and new psychoactive substances, making 
further use of advanced methods and technologies, 
such as artificial intelligence and satellite imagery 
analysis.
Enhance detection and monitoring of particularly 
harmful substances with significant negative 
implications for public health, such as synthetic 
opioids and new psychoactive substances.
Further strengthen threat assessments across 
the drugs supply chain, including a focus on how 
developments outside Europe may impact on the 
EU drug market.
Improve monitoring and analysis of drug 
market-related violence, using comparable 
indicators and tools, with the aim of developing a 
deeper understanding of its causes. In conjunction, 
prioritise the mapping of criminal networks that 
pose the highest threat.
Enhance monitoring and analysis of the use 
of online platforms to trade and distribute 
drugs. Particular attention should be paid to 
developments on the surface web and social 
media platforms, especially in relation to their use 
by young people.
Develop new frameworks to analyse the potential 
impact of legislative changes on illicit drug markets. 
This will require improved understanding of the size 
of the drug market and its possible impacts 
on governance. 

Actions to address current threats and increase preparedness
33
Strengthen 
responses 
to reduce supply 
and enhance 
security
Strengthen operational responses against 
criminal networks, particularly against high-risk 
criminal networks and high-value targets. The latter 
include the brokers and facilitators that enable illicit 
activities, such as money-laundering networks.
Further prioritise operational activities that 
dismantle entire criminal networks and their 
associates.
Make full use of relevant European tools for 
operational coordination and international 
cooperation, in particular operational task 
forces and joint investigation teams.
Enhance responses to the trafficking and diversion 
of precursors and essential chemicals used in drug 
production. Enhanced strategies are required 
to prevent criminal networks from exploiting 
weaknesses of current control measures and 
to reduce the supply of precursors.
Strengthen administrative barriers to prevent 
criminals from exploiting legal loopholes and the 
licit economy. This should include enhanced and 
targeted measures to tackle corruption to prevent 
criminals from undermining the rule of law.
Enhance interdiction capacity at seaports, post 
and parcel hubs in Europe. This should include 
the implementation of advanced monitoring 
technologies and tools.
Strengthen and further prioritise crime prevention 
policies focused on young people at risk of 
exploitation and recruitment by criminal networks. 
Prevention and awareness programmes targeted at 
online risk behaviours among young people should 
also be enhanced.

EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
34
Strengthen 
international 
cooperation
Strengthen engagement and cooperation with 
international organisations and third countries 
to tackle criminal networks across the entire supply 
chain for illicit drugs. Particular attention should be 
paid to improving cooperation at key hubs for drug 
flows destined for the European Union.
Promote the exchange of data and intelligence 
on drug trafficking networks, routes and trends 
to enhance situational awareness and coordinated 
responses between the European Union and third 
countries.
Further support the implementation of 
relevant European regulations and international 
agreements to harmonise legal frameworks to 
disrupt the drugs trade. Particular attention should 
be paid to improving frameworks for extraditing 
and prosecuting criminals operating in external 
countries.
Strengthen public-private partnerships to prevent 
the exploitation of licit business structures and 
international trade routes. This includes prioritising 
improved resilience against criminal activity in key 
logistics hubs.

Actions to address current threats and increase preparedness
35
Invest in 
capacity-building
Increase the human and financial resources 
devoted to operational and strategic responses. 
Particular attention should be paid to capacitybuilding in key entry points for drugs flows to 
Europe, and to ensuring coherence and alignment 
with established best practice.
Strengthen investment in the development and 
implementation of innovative detection, monitoring 
and analysis technologies.
Further invest in the training of key workers and 
officials, both within Europe and in key external 
countries, to raise awareness and further 
disseminate best practices to prevent criminal 
activities.
Enhance assistance and capacity-building support 
to third countries on key drug trafficking routes 
to Europe, focusing on law enforcement, border 
control and drug treatment and harm reduction 
programmes.

Strengthen policy, 
public health and 
safety responses
Further enhance evidence-based policymaking to 
mitigate the negative health and security impacts 
of illicit drug markets. Specifically, future-oriented 
policy approaches and responses are needed, 
based on detailed threat assessments, to anticipate 
and proactively mitigate emerging threats.
Improve targeted crime prevention efforts, focusing 
on vulnerable communities.
Enhance investments in targeted and 
evidence-based prevention, treatment and harm 
reduction interventions to mitigate the harmful 
consequences of drug use.
Improve policy awareness and responses to the 
environmental risks and damage associated with 
drug production, trafficking and use.

EU Drug Markets Analysis: Key insights for policy and practice
36
Towards a coherent 
approach
The EU legislative framework is key to providing a 
coherent approach for law enforcement and judicial 
authorities in tackling organised crime. This legislative 
framework provides Member States with efficient tools, 
such as the European Multidisciplinary Platform Against 
Criminal Threats (EMPACT), to disrupt criminal actors 
across the supply chain for illicit drugs. Going forward, 
there is a need to strengthen other integrated 
approaches that address the root causes of illicit drug 
markets. To this end, policies and responses should aim 
to tackle the social, economic and psychological drivers 
of illicit drug markets. Continued implementation of all 
relevant measures under the EU legislative framework, 
along with the development of new policies and 
responses to tackle emerging threats, is of great 
importance to ensure coherence in the fight 
against organised crime.

Detailed recommendations are available 
in the individual modules:
https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/eu-drug-markets_en
About the EMCDDA
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA) is the leading authority on illicit drugs 
in Europe. The Lisbon-based agency provides independent scientific evidence and analysis on all aspects of 
this constantly changing threat to individual lives and wider society. The EMCDDA supports EU and national 
policymaking by providing evidence-based information on drugs, drug addiction and their consequences.
The EMCDDA has been granted stronger powers to tackle current and future drug problems. On 2 July 2024, 
it will become the European Union Drugs Agency (EUDA). With its new fit-for-purpose mission, the EUDA will 
provide better support to European and Member States’ policymakers and professionals in the drugs field in 
addressing the causes and consequences of drug use.
www.emcdda.europa.eu
About Europol
Headquartered in The Hague, the Netherlands, Europol’s mission is to support its Member States in preventing 
and combating all forms of serious international and organised crime, cybercrime and terrorism. Europol also 
works with many non-EU partner states and international organisations. Europol is the EU’s hub for the exchange 
of criminal intelligence in Europe.
Europol’s focus is to make Europe safer. Large-scale criminal and terrorist networks pose a significant threat 
to the internal security of the EU and to the safety and livelihood of its people. The biggest security threats 
come from terrorism, international drug trafficking and money laundering, organised fraud, the counterfeiting 
of euros and trafficking in human beings.
With over 1 800 highly-skilled staff from all 27 EU Member States and beyond, Europol is at the cutting edge 
of international crime-fighting.
www.europol.europa.eu
Your 
feedback 
matters. 
By clicking on the following link or scanning the embedded QR code 
you can fill in a short user survey on the received strategic report.
https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/eus_strategic_reports

Getting in touch with the EU
In person
All over the European Union there are hundreds of Europe Direct centres. You can find the 
address of the centre nearest you online (european-union.europa.eu/contact-eu/meet-us_en).
On the phone or in writing
Europe Direct is a service that answers your questions about the European Union. 
You can contact this service: 
• by freephone: 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 (certain operators may charge for these calls), 
• at the following standard number: +32 22999696, 
• via the following form: european-union.europa.eu/contact-eu/write-us_en.
Finding information about the EU
Online
Information about the European Union in all the official languages of the EU is available on 
the Europa website (european-union.europa.eu).
EU publications
You can view or order EU publications at op.europa.eu/en/publications. Multiple copies of free 
publications can be obtained by contacting Europe Direct or your local documentation centre 
(european-union.europa.eu/contact-eu/meet-us_en).
EU law and related documents
For access to legal information from the EU, including all EU law since 1951 in all the official 
language versions, go to EUR-Lex (eur-lex.europa.eu).
EU open data
The portal data.europa.eu provides access to open datasets from the EU institutions, bodies 
and agencies. These can be downloaded and reused for free, for both commercial and 
non-commercial purposes. The portal also provides access to a wealth of datasets from 
European countries.

About this resource
This resource has been developed by the EMCDDA 
and Europol and co-produced with the EMCDDA 
Reference Group on Drug Supply Indicators. It draws 
on the detailed findings presented in EU Drug Markets: 
In-depth analysis, the fourth comprehensive overview 
of illicit drug markets in the European Union. It offers 
a strategic and top-level summary for policymakers 
and decision-makers, to support the development and 
implementation of policies and actions in Europe, based 
on a robust understanding of the current drug landscape 
and emerging threats. It also serves practitioners 
working in the field and is intended to raise awareness 
among the general public about these issues.