EU Drug Market: Drivers and facilitators —
Globalisation
Globalisation is the process by which entities become globally
interconnected through networks of communication, trade and
transportation. This has a significant effect on illicit drug markets,
as criminal networks exploit globalisation to achieve similar
benefits to participants in the legal economy. Globalisation has
provided significant opportunities for criminal cooperation, while
also enabling cheaper, faster and more efficient criminal
operations – as seen in the trafficking of large quantities of illicit
drugs.
Criminal cooperation
Globalisation provides opportunities for criminal cooperation and integration along the supply
chain, thus making operations more efficient. Drug trafficking stands out as one of the main
activities of the most threatening criminal networks in the EU, with about half of the reported
networks involved in this crime area (Europol, 2024a). The impact of globalisation on
communication channels, specifically the process of digitalisation, has played a key role in enabling
cooperation between criminal networks in Europe and globally (see Box Digital cooperation).
Greater interconnectedness between criminal networks has also boosted the emergence of key
facilitators that provide their services to several different networks. Criminal ventures increasingly
mirror licit business models, where partnerships are formed opportunistically based on business
needs, while some services are outsourced to specialised criminal service providers. Ad hoc or
more permanent partnerships are often established between different criminal networks, in which
brokers or criminal service providers work together with individual criminals or groups tied to core
criminal activities, such as drug trafficking. This has led to a serious and organised crime
environment that is simultaneously characterised by fragmentation and networking, where profit
is the main motivation for cooperation.
This resource is part of EU
Drug Market: Drivers and
facilitators by the EMCDDA
and Europol.
Last update: 30 May 2024
- 1 -

Digital cooperation
The digital transformation of our societies, economies and private lives is reflected in the
operations of criminal networks. The internet and new technologies increasingly facilitate rapid
communication between participants in drug exchanges and allow new models of criminal groups
to develop and operate. Administrators of darknet markets and online vendors of illicit drugs
illustrate a model of digital criminal cooperation (Leukfeldt et al., 2019). Other communication
channels featuring end-to-end encryption, such as instant messaging applications, are also used
by criminal networks for rapid communication, with reduced visibility to law enforcement (see
Section Encrypted communication).
Services provided to drug-trafficking networks
The use of criminal service providers by drug-trafficking networks has become widespread in
recent years. While some networks manage most of their operations independently, drug
trafficking typically requires establishing fluid collaboration between networks, sharing
responsibilities and outsourcing certain functions or even entire stages of the trafficking chain to
specialised networks or individuals. In this context, crime-as-a-service provides flexibility to drugtrafficking networks in managing their illicit activities, which involve distinct stages and often span
different countries or continents (see Box Crime-as-a-service). Services include transportation and
logistics, supply chain management, waste disposal, provision of fraudulent documents (e.g. to
facilitate the transportation of drugs or procurement of essential chemicals and equipment) and
money laundering.
Crime-as-a-service
The increasing availability of knowledge, tools and expertise provided to criminal networks
through crime-as-a-service, in which criminals use the services of other, more specialised
criminals, has enabled a greater number of criminal networks to engage in multiple criminal
activities despite lacking specific expertise or experience. The crime-as-a-service component also
allows criminal networks involved in drug trafficking to be more geographically flexible and to
optimise their business models by outsourcing specific activities to dedicated service providers.
More criminal individuals and networks offer a wider range of specialised services to other
criminal networks, both offline and online (Roddy and Holt, 2020). For example, certain criminal
networks are specialised in the management of the logistics and supply chains for drug producers
in the European Union. Their specialised services include procurement of drug precursors and
other chemicals required for drug production, and the provision of equipment or expertise needed
to establish drug production facilities. Often, legal business structures are set up (or purchased) to
access chemicals and to facilitate and conceal trafficking operations. Other service providers may
include specialists who customise vehicles to conceal drugs, those who arrange the transportation
of drug consignments to destination countries or IT specialists who manage and maintain the
infrastructure for the online drugs trade.
- 2 -

Brokers are also present in all stages of criminal business operations and serve multiple criminal
networks. They are essential in connecting these networks to each other and to criminal service
providers. In the context of drug-trafficking operations, brokers connect drug producers to
wholesale distributors, to transportation providers and to retail distributors. This may lead to a
shift between or expansion of the range of drugs offered by certain networks (see Box Poly-drug
trafficking). They also facilitate contact with other criminal specialists who provide firearms,
fraudulent documents, chemicals, equipment and expertise for drugs production. Some brokers
coordinate the movement of drugs consignments and facilitate money laundering, waste disposal
and access to compromised individuals.
Poly-drug trafficking
Criminal networks involved in drug trafficking in the European Union are often involved in trading
different types of drugs. While poly-drug trafficking has remained a very visible feature among
mid-level suppliers and distributors, top-level criminal networks also traffic large-scale
consignments that include more than one type of drug. Another aspect of the poly-drug nature of
drug trafficking in Europe is the use of drugs and precursors as currency, occasionally seen in the
form of drug swaps between criminal networks (for example, cannabis traded for heroin on the
Balkan route in Türkiye).
Transportation and logistics
A key aspect of globalisation is the interconnectedness of global supply chains caused by the
digitalisation of international logistics. The role played by information technology in checking and
managing traffic flows at seaports and airports has increased the importance to criminals of
having access to automated logistics systems. They may obtain such access through the
corruption or cooperation of key staff, such as through bribes or extortion, and by hacking into
computer networks or via publicly accessible databases (as both maritime and air traffic data are
often publicly available). A recent assessment of the threat of infiltration of EU port infrastructure
by organised crime highlighted the techniques that criminal networks use to exploit loopholes in
logistical processes, such as misappropriating container reference codes to gain access to
containers in which drugs are trafficked (known as PIN code fraud) (Europol and the Security
Steering Committee of the ports of Antwerp, Hamburg/Bremerhaven and Rotterdam, 2023). In
future, it is plausible that entire logistical chains will be automated, which may create the potential
for exploitation by criminal networks (for example, if criminals are able to compromise one part of
the system, they may then gain access to the whole logistical chain). Appropriate technological
responses are therefore needed to mitigate these threats (see Box Real-time vessel tracking
capability developed by Frontex).
- 3 -

Real-time vessel tracking capability developed by Frontex
The concept of ‘connected’ or ‘smart containers’ (electronic tracking of containers) provides
opportunities to mitigate the threats posed by criminal networks that exploit containerised
shipping. Using sensors, connected shipping containers provide real-time visibility of global cargo
flows and indications of when, where and possibly why disruptions or delays have occurred (DHL,
2022). Connected containers thus have the potential to reduce the risk of criminal exploitation
during transportation.
This concept has been operationalised by the European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex),
which has developed the Joint Operations Reporting Application (JORA): an information collection
and analysis tool for tracking the itinerary of target vessels in real time. The tool is available to
Member States upon request. It supports the authorities’ operations by allowing them to track
vessels suspected of carrying drugs and thus providing an accurate picture of the routes taken by
traffickers from origin or transit areas to destination ports in Europe.
Maritime transportation
According to the UNODC, an estimated 90 % of the global cargo trade is transported by sea every
year (amounting to over 750 million 20-foot equivalent units) (1) (UNODC, date unspecified). Given
that maritime transport is used in 77 % of EU external trade and 35 % of all trade by value between
EU Member States, it forms a key part of the international supply chain. Despite a temporary dip in
activity in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the maritime transport sector continues to grow,
fuelled by rising demand for primary resources and container shipping (EEA and EMSA, 2021).
The criminal exploitation of maritime routes continues to be a critical enabler of drug trafficking,
as only a small fraction of shipping containers globally is screened. Large container ports in Europe
and other continents continue to be exploited by drug traffickers for bulk transportation. In 2020,
72 % of the 609 drug detections made during Frontex-coordinated joint operations were reported
at sea borders or adjacent areas (Frontex, 2021). As detailed in other EU Drug Markets resources
(see EU Drug Market: Cocaine), most of the cocaine available on the EU market enters via the
largest container ports in Europe, although increasingly, smaller ports are also utilised. Maritime
routes have also risen in prominence for the trafficking of other drugs such as heroin (see EU Drug
Market: Heroin and other opioids). Recently, large quantities of cannabis have also been trafficked
in maritime containers to Europe, including from North America (see EU Drug Market: Cannabis
). In August 2023, more than 1 tonne of cannabis was seized in Rotterdam from a container
shipped from Canada (Openbaar Ministerie, 2023). These developments underscore how
globalisation is erasing barriers between origin, transit and consumer destinations for illicit drug
flows.
Factors affecting the maritime sector are likely to influence the global drug trade. For example,
conflict, instability and economic pressures may lead to shifting supply routes, as already observed
in the rise in heroin trafficking along the southern maritime route from Afghanistan to Europe (see
- 4 -

EU Drug Market: Heroin and other opioids). Such changes may in turn affect drug-trafficking
routes, prices (and purities) along the supply chain, or lead to other routes or transportation
methods being used to move drug consignments globally.
Diversification of maritime trafficking methods
In recent years, diversification has been observed in the methods used for maritime drug
trafficking (see EU Drug Market: Cocaine; see also Figure Maritime trafficking: diversification of
modi operandi). Typically, drug traffickers operate front companies, which they establish
themselves or preferably buy, becoming the owners of businesses with a history of legal activity.
This enables them to conceal activities related to illicit drugs, such as purchasing equipment or
moving funds, but crucially also to hide drug consignments in legitimate maritime shipments.
Alternatively, traffickers appropriate the containers of other companies and use them to transport
large quantities of drugs. This is achieved by breaking open the containers before export,
depositing the drugs inside and re-sealing the container with cloned seals to hide the tampering
(known as rip-on/rip-off). In some cases, the containers are contaminated en route to the
destination, in transhipment locations.
On arrival, the traffickers require access to the port to retrieve the stashed drugs from the
containers. To do so, they may either trespass or pay port workers in order to obtain access.
Corruption, as well as being a negative consequence of drug markets, is a key enabler of
organised criminal activity – and opportunities for corruption exist at every stage of the drug
supply chain.
- 5 -

Maritime trafficking: diversification of modi operandi
- 6 -

Civil aviation
In addition to maritime transport, air transport is also used for drug trafficking to and within the
European Union. The two main categories of civil aviation used are scheduled air transport,
including passenger and cargo flights operating on regular routes, and general aviation, which
includes all other commercial and private flights. Detecting consignments of drugs trafficked via
general aviation is particularly challenging as it is less regulated than scheduled air transport, and
as a result there is limited opportunity to inspect air cargo. Criminal networks use general aviation,
from small aircraft to business jets, for trafficking drugs making use of the services provided by
skilled collaborators, mostly well-experienced pilots commissioned for ad hoc projects
Air cargo has become a key facilitator for the online trade, and this has also had an impact on drug
trafficking. In 2021, air cargo represented a third of the revenue of International Air Transport
Association member airlines, driven by an increase in demand and a decrease in passenger travel
during the pandemic (IATA, 2021b). Estimates show that around 80 % of cross-border online trade
(e-commerce) is transported by air (IATA, 2021a).
Criminal networks increasingly exploit the opportunities of air cargo services for drug trafficking
by concealing drugs among legitimate cargo or within the airplane itself. An in-depth analysis of 16
cases from the Dutch Organised Crime Monitor found that traffickers use Amsterdam Airport
Schiphol as a key logistical node by exploiting the infrastructure set up for legal economic activities
(Madarie and Kruisbergen, 2020). In one case, a criminal group established a cleaning company at
the airport to gain access to aircraft and IT systems (Madarie and Kruisbergen, 2020). The use of
airports for drug trafficking can be likened to that of maritime ports, in terms of the mechanisms
involved to evade security, for example by using corrupt employees or law enforcement agents.
Differences in the way airports operate and their security arrangements, however, mean that
criminal networks sometimes use different methods to those used in seaports.
Post and parcel services
Globalisation and digitalisation have paved the way for the expansion of express post and parcel
delivery services, with the growing trend for online shopping associated with an increase in parcel
deliveries in Europe (Eurostat, 2022; Statista, 2021). The overall quantity of drugs trafficked by
these means remains limited compared with other forms of transportation (such as maritime and
air traffic). Nevertheless, the increase in postal delivery volumes poses challenges for the
systematic inspection of parcels and presents an opportunity for drug traffickers to traffic smaller
quantities of drugs rapidly at global level. As a consequence, law enforcement authorities in EU
Member States, and customs agencies in particular, have sought to increase checks in post and
parcel hubs.
Criminals often conceal the origin and content of parcels by making false declarations and using
fraudulent documents to circumvent risk indicators used to identify parcels for checks. To some
degree, the identification of suppliers is also hampered by differences in regulatory frameworks
and reporting between EU and non-EU postal systems and the use of parcel-forwarding services
(see Box Parcel-forwarding services).
- 7 -

Parcel-forwarding services
Criminals use parcel-forwarding services to facilitate the trafficking of illicit commodities. In this
method, postal companies may provide their clients with addresses in other jurisdictions, repack
the parcels and guarantee international shipment to the final destination. This creates
opportunities for criminals intending to conceal the origin, final destination and nature of illicit
shipments. Since these companies do not usually open the packages, criminals can conceal the
nature of the shipments by sending false customs declarations.
In particular, the postal system is often used for deliveries of online drug purchases (through
social media, the surface web and darknet markets). This trend appears to have rapidly expanded
and intensified during the COVID-19 pandemic. Examples from Germany and the Netherlands
illustrate how criminals use this method, which affects all Member States, and a number of
countries have reported considerable increases in letters and parcels containing drugs (see Box
Post and parcel seizures in Germany and the Netherlands). The specific routing of parcels varies
widely, including direct routes from source to destination or via EU transit hubs and non-EU
locations.
Post and parcel seizures in Germany and the Netherlands
During checks of outgoing mail at the International Mail Centre in Frankfurt between September
2016 and the end of 2019, German Customs seized a total of around 28 500 letters containing
approximately 2 000 kg of illicit drugs, including over 1.4 million MDMA tablets. These mail
consignments were destined to over 90 different countries. At the end of 2019, Austria was ranked
the second recipient destination (after the United States) for the seizures made in Frankfurt. The
items destined for Austria contained over 240 kilograms of illicit drugs, mainly amphetamine and
MDMA (BMI, 2021).
In 2020, Dutch Customs, in collaboration with the Public Prosecution Service, launched a
programme of more rigorous checking of postal shipments. By mid-2021, the programme had
resulted in the seizure of more than 8 000 packages and letters containing mainly synthetic drugs.
More than 2 700 postal items contained MDMA; over 1 300 items contained cannabis products;
and the rest contained a range of other substances, including cocaine, heroin, ketamine and LSD
(Rijksoverheid, 2021). Illicit drugs produced in the Netherlands and purchased online are not only
shipped directly from the country, but are often also dispatched by mail from neighbouring
Belgium and Germany (National Police of the Netherlands, 2022).
Targeted screening, supported by artificial intelligence, can make it easier to identify postal items
with illicit contents. Such measures can significantly disrupt the distribution of illicit drugs by this
modus operandi. They can also help protect postal service staff from coming into contact with
potentially dangerous substances. Dutch Customs, in partnership with PostNL and the police, are
working to introduce algorithms in the scanning process to check mail more effectively in postal
sorting centres (Rijksoverheid, 2021).
(1) A 20-foot equivalent unit represents the cargo capacity of a standard multimodal container.
- 8 -

References
Consult the list of references used in this module.
This PDF was generated automatically on 1/10/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/eu-drug-markets/drivers-and-facilitators/globalisation_en. Some errors may
have occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web
page.
- 9 -