EU Drug Market: MDMA — Retail markets
How is MDMA sold in Europe?
MDMA is most commonly found on the European market in the
form of ecstasy tablets, relatively pure crystals or powders (finely
ground crystals of MDMA that are typically mixed with other
substances). These products typically contain MDMA
hydrochloride (see Box Forms of MDMA present on the European
market).
Since they emerged on the European drug market in the 1990s,
ecstasy tablets were the most common form of MDMA consumed
in Europe, but following a period where consumer trust in these
products was low around the mid to late 2000s, powders/crystals gained a share of the market (
Gremeaux, 2022; Mounteney et al., 2018). According to 2021 data, tablets and powders/crystals
share the EU MDMA market equally, with some variability among countries in terms of preference
for either ecstasy tablets or MDMA powders/crystals (see Figure 6.1. Distribution of usual MDMA
forms across countries). While not representative, data from the 2021 European Web Survey on
Drugs (EWSD) (1) found that tablets were used by 42 % of the 17 098 respondents who had used
MDMA in the last 12 months, compared with 24 % for powder/crystal. Around 33 % of respondents
reported using both forms of the drug.
This resource is part of EU
Drug Market: MDMA — Indepth analysis by the
EUDA and Europol.
Last update: March 2025
- 1 -

Figure 6.1. Distribution of usual MDMA forms across countries
Source: European Web Survey on Drugs (EWSD), 2021. Survey question: ‘What forms of ecstasy/MDMA do you usually use?’. See
Methodology.
Samples submitted to drug-checking services can also provide an indication of the products
available to consumers. However, these data are not generalisable either, and as such should be
interpreted with caution. Of the 6 811 samples submitted as MDMA to drug-checking services in
eight EU countries (2) between 2019 and 2022, 57 % were tablets and 42 % were crystals (including
‘rocks’) or powders, without significant year-on-year variation (see Figure 6.2. MDMA samples
analysed by drug-checking services, 2019-2022). Additional data were shared with the EUDA by the
Drug information and Monitoring System (DIMS) in the Netherlands. Of nearly 53 500 MDMA
samples analysed by DIMS over the same period, the average proportion of tablets was 58 %
(ranging from 48 % in 2020 to 65 % in 2022).
- 2 -

Figure 6.2. MDMA samples analysed by drug-checking services, 2019-2022
MDMA samples analysed by drug-checking services
Source: TEDI (Trans-European Drug Information project).
MDMA samples analysed by drug-checking services by sample form, 2019-2022
- 3 -

Source: TEDI (Trans-European Drug Information project).
Other types of MDMA products occasionally appear on the drug market. For example, alcoholic
drinks containing MDMA are submitted for drug checking from time to time. More rarely, almost
pure MDMA base in liquid form has been sold to consumers, which represents a serious health risk
(Drugs Information Monitoring System [DIMS], 2022). In recent years, the appearance of
alternative (non-tablet) edible consumer products containing MDMA has also been reported,
including candies, jellies, gummies and lollipops (see Box 6.1. Lollipops containing MDMA seized in
Belgium). These products may make the use of MDMA more socially acceptable and appeal to nonhabitual consumers and young people.
Box 6.1. Lollipops containing MDMA seized in Belgium
Dozens of lollipops containing MDMA were seized in 2021 in Belgium. The products had a net
weight of approximately 20 grams each and contained between 130 and 176 milligrams of MDMA,
evenly distributed inside the lollipops. Although unusual, this was not the first time that these
types of products had been found in Europe. Sugary products containing MDMA may disguise the
taste of the substance and mask the Marquis reagent test that is commonly used to identify the
presence of MDMA in a sample.
- 4 -

Source: Belgian Federal Police.
MDMA is mostly bought face-to-face from known sellers
Studying the drug purchasing behaviours of users is useful for understanding market dynamics,
but challenging given the clandestine nature of these transactions. Web-based surveys, such as
the EWSD, can provide a helpful insight, although the results cannot be generalised to the
population as a whole, or indeed to all people who use drugs. Data from drug-checking services
can also inform on the type of relationships that exist between the consumer and the provider.
Together, these two data sources suggests that the large majority of MDMA users buy the drug
themselves, and that a smaller proportion obtains it for free, despite marked differences among
EU countries. Consumers appear to mostly buy MDMA from what they perceive to be trusted
sources (usual suppliers, close friends and friends), but street suppliers and acquaintances are also
relevant sources, as is the internet (including surface web, darknet and social media), albeit to a
smaller extent.
In 2021, among the EWSD respondents who had used MDMA in the last 12 months (n = 17 098),
close to three quarters (72 %) reported mostly buying the drug, whereas one quarter (25 %)
declared that they had obtained it for free. Differences between countries were apparent,
however. For example, 79 % of the Polish respondents reported mostly buying the drug, compared
- 5 -

to 51 % of the respondents from Luxembourg.
Among EWSD respondents who provided further information (n = 6 946), a clear majority (78 %)
had bought MDMA directly from a dealer, in person, via phone, mail or text message. Smaller
numbers of respondents also reported using the darknet (13 %) and social media (7 %). The use of
these methods differed between countries, indicating that some purchasing practices are more
common in some countries than in others. For example, the proportion of those buying MDMA
directly from a dealer ranged from 61 % in Finland and Sweden to 95 % in Spain, and figures for
the use of the darknet ranged from 0 % in Bulgaria and Cyprus to about 44 % in Finland. It should
be noted, however, that the sample sizes were small in some countries.
More than three quarters of EWSD respondents (77 %) reported meeting their dealer outside as
the usual method for receiving drugs, followed by home delivery (17 %). An equal percentage of
respondents reported delivery through regular mail or post, and picking the drugs up from a
location without any personal contact (7 %).
Data collected from individuals submitting 6 811 MDMA samples to drug-checking services
between 2019 and 2022 appear to support these findings from the EWSD. Based on reporting from
drug-checking clients, the majority of samples were reported as being obtained from a supplier
(either a trusted supplier or a random street supplier) and a smaller proportion (close to 5 %) as
bought on the internet (surface web or darknet).
A smaller share of retail consumers buys MDMA online
MDMA is one of the most frequently traded drugs online across a range of platforms, including
darknet markets (see Section Trafficking and distribution — online trade and distribution on
darknet markets) as well as surface web and social media platforms. Despite this, on average, only
a minority of EWSD respondents reported obtaining the drug online, although this varied widely
across countries. This appears to be supported by existing studies that indicate that MDMA is
bought online mostly by retail distributors for the purpose of re-sale rather than purchased
directly by retail clients (Aldridge and Décary-Hétu, 2016; Gremeaux, 2022).
Recently, however, social media platforms and instant messaging applications have become
particularly dynamic online channels through which MDMA is sold to consumers. The growing
exploitation of these platforms is likely tied to the objective of reaching a wider audience. This is a
development that requires closer monitoring.
Retail quantities sold online are often dispatched in post and parcels from EU Member States to
consumer markets in Europe and globally, and cryptocurrencies are often used to settle these
online transactions. Additionally, particularly with instant messaging applications, transactions
may be organised online, but completed using in-person pick-up or ‘dead-drop’ delivery.
- 6 -

Price and purity
Although often used interchangeably, ecstasy and MDMA are not necessarily synonyms.
Consumers buying ecstasy expect the tablets to contain MDMA. However, adulteration is
commonplace, and therefore these tablets may contain a variety of substances in addition to, or
instead of, MDMA. Rates of adulteration of ecstasy tablets, their MDMA content and their price
tend to reflect broader changes in the factors that affect the MDMA market. This includes law
enforcement pressure, a variety of factors affecting MDMA production, such as the availability of
MDMA precursors, and, more generally, globalisation of the illicit drug supply chains.
Ecstasy adulteration is responsive to market pressures
When availability of MDMA is high, ecstasy tablets tend to contain MDMA as the main or only
psychoactive ingredient, with the opposite occurring when there are shortages. These shortages
tend to be transitory, which means that essentially there are cycles of adulteration. One way to
observe these cycles is to monitor rates of adulteration, as expressed by the percentage of tested
samples of seized ecstasy tablets that contain MDMA and no other scheduled substances.
Although these data may not be representative of the market as a whole, they can provide an
approximate historical overview of the changes in adulteration of ecstasy tablets in Europe (see
Figure 6.3. Indexed trend of the average percentage of ecstasy tablets containing MDMA as the
only scheduled substance).
- 7 -

Figure 6.3. Indexed trend of the average percentage of ecstasy tablets containing MDMA
as the only scheduled substance
From 2004 to 2009, the proportion of seized European ecstasy tablets that contained MDMA as the
only scheduled substance dropped substantially. In 2009, on average, only 31 % of the tablets
analysed contained MDMA alone, compared with almost 100 % in 2004. This drop coincided with a
worldwide shortage of safrole, an essential precursor for MDMA which had been under
international control since 1992 but was the target of a major law enforcement clampdown around
2008. In 2009 and the following years, it was therefore unlikely that consumers who purchased
ecstasy in Europe would obtain unadulterated MDMA. Crystal MDMA appeared on the European
market at that time, as a response to a fall in consumer confidence due to concerns about the low
quality of ecstasy. Crystal MDMA was marketed as a purer product compared to ecstasy tablets, an
assertion that was and remains largely true (see Section The trend of large tablets containing more
MDMA may be reversing).
As producers found designer precursor alternatives to PMK, the availability of MDMA increased.
PMK glycidate, first reported in Europe in 2013, had a particular role in this resurgence (see Section
Production - designer precursors substitute scheduled MDMA starting materials). The increase in
ecstasy tablets containing only MDMA from 2013 until 2019 is likely to be a reflection of this, at
least in part.
From 2019 onwards a new cycle appears to have begun, whereby the number of ecstasy tablets
containing other substances alongside, or instead of, MDMA has increased (as expressed by a drop
in percentage in the indexed trends shown above from 96 % in 2019 to 73 % in 2022). Again, these
data should be interpreted with caution and not necessarily be seen as statistically representative
- 8 -

of the market as a whole. Nevertheless, it may be an indicator of MDMA market trends. This
finding is also consistent with pressure on the MDMA market coming from reduced access to PMK
glycidate (controlled internationally in 2019) and the closure of recreational settings associated
with MDMA use during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Data from 10 drug-checking organisations belonging to the Trans European Drug Information
(TEDI) network also support these findings: in 2019, 93 % of the 1 165 samples submitted as
ecstasy contained MDMA alone, while in 2022 that percentage had dropped to 84 % (of 1 525
samples).
MDMA adulterants
Adulteration of MDMA occurs by adding other psychoactive substances, typically stimulants, to
MDMA in tablet, powder or crystal form. A number of substances can also be sold as MDMA, in
what is sometimes called mis-selling or adulteration by substitution – whereby another substance
is passed off as MDMA to the consumer. Based on samples submitted to drug checking, one study
in Spain found that mis-selling of MDMA is more frequent than adulteration: it is more common to
find other substances sold as MDMA than to find other psychoactive substances added to MDMA (
Vidal Giné et al., 2022). Adulteration appears to be more frequent in ecstasy tablets than in MDMA
crystals.
Caffeine is the adulterant most commonly found in ecstasy tablets as well as in MDMA powders
and crystals. In powders and crystals, common adulterants also include phenacetin, paracetamol
or dextromethorphan (Vidal Giné et al., 2022). In tablets, adulterants typically include stimulants
and MDMA-type substances – other phenethylamines with comparable subjective effects, such as
MDA (3). In the period from 2019 to 2023, caffeine, 4-CMC (4), amphetamine, cocaine and MDA
were the adulterants most commonly found in MDMA samples (tablets and powders/crystals)
submitted to drug-checking organisations belonging to the TEDI network. Interestingly, synthesis
by-products were also commonly reported, about which little is known and which may pose
additional risks to consumers.
On occasion, neurotoxic compounds such as PMMA (5) are detected mixed with, or as a
replacement for, MDMA in ecstasy tablets. Although rare, this seems to be more common in
periods of low availability of MDMA and has been associated with fatal intoxications. Although
MDMA alone is associated with a relatively small number of serious adverse events compared to
other drugs, its health risks can drastically increase when taken in large quantities (see Box 6.3.
High-strength MDMA tablets: understanding the risks) or mixed with other substances –
particularly those which can synergistically increase the effects of MDMA.
One relatively recent adulteration pattern is the increase of synthetic cathinones mis-sold as
MDMA or used to adulterate MDMA. These signals were reported to the EU Early Warning System
from 2022 onwards, based on identifications occurring in Spain, the Netherlands and Austria, and
there are similar indications for the United Kingdom (Pascoe et al., 2022). These signals have
occurred when the availability of cathinones seems to be at a historical high in the European Union
(see EU Drug Market: New psychoactive substances – In-depth analysis). The detection of mixtures
- 9 -

of MDMA and ketamine combined with other substances including cocaine have also increased in
some regions of Europe, and are sold as ‘pink cocaine’, ‘tuci’ or ‘tucibi’ (see Box 6.3. What is tucibi?).
Box 6.2. What is tucibi?
Tuci or tucibi (also spelled tusi and tusibi) are phonetic transliterations of ‘2C’ (a series of
psychoactive phenethylamines) or ‘2C-B’ (one of the most well-known derivatives of that series of
substances). Tuci or tucibi products can also be sold under the name ‘pink cocaine’ despite rarely
containing 2C-type phenethylamines or cocaine. Rather, tuci and tucibi are typically pink powders,
often with a sweet smell derived from food colouring (Palamar, 2023). These mixtures were first
reported around 2021 in Latin America (namely Colombia) and were found to contain a variety of
substances: mostly MDMA and ketamine and sometimes also cocaine, methamphetamine, opioids
or new psychoactive substances. It was hypothesised at the time that drug traffickers were trying
to recreate some of the properties of 2C-B by mixing substances with stimulant and hallucinogenic
properties (UNODC, 2022), or to counteract some of 2C-B’s less appealing features for consumers
(namely it is painful to snort and damaging to the sinuses and may result in gastrointestinal
distress) (United States Department of Justice, 2001).
Throughout 2021, and continuing into 2022 and 2023, a number of detections of pink powders
consistent with tucibi were reported to the EU Early Warning System. The majority of these
identifications were reported by Spain, although pink powders have also been reported in Czechia,
Germany, Estonia, Hungary, the Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Romania, Sweden and Norway.
These detections have generally been small in quantity with the powders containing a range of
different substances – always ketamine and MDMA, and typically additional substances including
cocaine, caffeine or cathinones. However, larger seizures of these mixtures have also been
reported in the European Union. For example, in August 2022 an organised crime group was
dismantled in Spain; it was involved in the trafficking of tucibi and had connections to Colombia.
More than 13 kilograms of a mixture described as pink cocaine was seized, alongside 6 kilograms
of cocaine, 6 kilograms of ketamine, firearms and large sums of cash and luxury items (Guardia
Civil, 2022). In May 2023, a criminal network smuggling tucibi inside 3D-printed double-bottomed
packages to Colombia and Australia was dismantled in Seville, resulting in nine arrests. A
somewhat similar scheme was uncovered several months later, in November 2023, where 3Dprinted figurines used to conceal tucibi were intercepted before being shipped to the United States
(Guardia Civil, 2022).
- 10 -

3D manufactured figurines containing shipments of tucibi, shipped from Spain to the United
States. Source: Spanish Guardia Civil.
Although very rarely reported, opioids may also be found in tablets sold as MDMA. In Australia, in
January 2024, potent opioids of the nitazene family were found in brightly coloured tablets with
logos reminiscent of ecstasy tablets. At least three people were hospitalised after consuming these
tablets.
The trend of large tablets containing more MDMA may be
reversing
The average content of MDMA in ecstasy tablets appears to be on a slight downward trend from
2019, after close to a decade of increasingly stronger (and larger) tablets becoming available on
the market. In 2011, ecstasy tablets contained on average between 35 milligrams and
119 milligrams of MDMA (mean: 84 milligrams). However, by 2019, those values varied between
118 milligrams and 202 milligrams (mean: 170 milligrams). This means that consumers buying
ecstasy tablets in Europe in 2019 would obtain a product containing up to almost double the
highest amount of MDMA recorded in ecstasy tablets in 2011.
However, from 2019 onwards, the quantity of MDMA found in tablets appears to have slightly
decreased. In 2022, the values ranged between 104 milligrams and 168 milligrams (mean:
144 milligrams) – roughly comparable to values reported in 2017 (see Figure 6.4. Quantity of
MDMA, in milligrams, per ecstasy tablet (mean)).
- 11 -

Figure 6.4. Quantity of MDMA, in milligrams, per ecstasy tablet (mean)
Note: Includes base and salt forms.
In the first period, between 2011 and 2019, the increase in MDMA content is largely attributed to
the sale of larger (heavier) ecstasy tablets. A study conducted by 10 drug-checking organisations
from the TEDI network found that the increase in MDMA content in tablets in this time period was
directly related to an increase in the average weight of ecstasy tablets (Vrolijk et al., 2022). This
means that the ratio of MDMA to fillers (excipients) in the mixtures used to make ecstasy tablets
did not increase over this time period.
While individual tablet weight cannot be a direct predictor of how much MDMA is present in each
tablet, at population level this trend is consistent when comparing larger ecstasy tablets (almost
always containing more MDMA) with smaller tablets (almost always containing less MDMA). It
should be noted that this trend was observed across several countries in Europe. This is consistent
with law enforcement information that suggests the MDMA market in Europe is supplied by the
same pool of producers, mostly based in the Netherlands and Belgium.
However, this trend appears to be changing, as ecstasy tablets have tended to contain less MDMA
since 2019. This trend may be a combination of the scheduling of PMK glycidate, and a reduction in
demand for MDMA during the COVID-19 pandemic, and is in line with the changes observed in the
adulteration of ecstasy tablets (see Section Ecstasy adulteration is responsive to market pressures).
Data reported to drug-checking services are generally in agreement with these trends. In 2023,
39 % of the MDMA tablets tested by drug checking organisations submitting data to the TEDI
- 12 -

network contained between 100 and 149.0 milligrams of MDMA (35 % in the same period in 2022),
and 26 % contained between 150 and 199.9 milligrams (29 % in 2022). On occasion, exceptionally
high-strength ecstasy tablets were reported, reaching upwards of 250 milligrams of MDMA per
tablet, which made up 1 % of all tablets tested in 2023 (3 % in the same period in 2022). Highstrength MDMA tablets can have serious health consequences (see Box 6.3. High-strength MDMA
tablets: understanding the risks).
Data reported to the EUDA over the last decade (2011-2021) show that while the proportion of
MDMA in tablets has varied between 40 and 50 %, the purity of MDMA powder and crystals has
typically varied between 70 and 80 %. Meanwhile, data from drug-checking services suggest that
approximately 85 % of the powders tested in 2023 contained between 80 and 100 % MDMA (81 %
in 2022).
Box 6.3.High-strength MDMA tablets: understanding the risks
Tablets containing more than 150 milligrams of MDMA are considered high-strength ecstasy
tablets, given the dose of MDMA required to elicit subjective effects in adults (a). Occasionally,
tablets containing 250 milligrams or more of MDMA are encountered on EU drug markets. For
example, in August 2023, tablets containing 350 milligrams of MDMA were seized in Spain. In
November 2023, two tablets collected by Energy Control’s drug-checking services in Spain were
also of very high-strength: one contained 371 milligrams of MDMA, and the other contained
300 milligrams. In December 2023, beige-golden ecstasy pills with an Audi-logo containing over
300 milligrams of MDMA (between 316 and 324 milligrams) were submitted to drug testing in the
Netherlands (DIMS, 2023). These identifications of high-strength ecstasy tablets prompted harm
reduction organisations to issue alerts.
Some of the high-strength ecstasy tablets are scored to allow consumers to divide them into
smaller portions. Some tablets even contain stamping that indicate the quantity of MDMA present,
although this is not always accurate and may also constitute a health risk. Nonetheless, even when
dividing a high-strength tablet into smaller pieces, doses may still be too high and increase the
risks of acute physical and psychological discomfort (e.g. anxiety), hyperthermia and even
potentially fatal reactions such as cardiac events, and serotonin syndrome (see Section Harms and
risks). Harm reduction responses, including the provision of drug-checking services and
appropriate risk-communication strategies, are crucial to minimise these risks.
- 13 -

Tablets seized in Spain containing 350 milligrams of MDMA. Source: Spanish Police.
(a) In clinical trials, doses of MDMA capable of producing subjective effects vary from 1.5 to 1.7 mg/kg of body weight, or approximately
105 to 119 milligrams for a 70-kilogram individual. Individual factors and sex affect this dose, with women considered to be more
susceptible to the 5-HT-releasing effects of MDMA (Liechti et al., 2001).
Price
Data on the retail price of MDMA in the European Union are limited, but the available indicators
suggest that prices have not changed significantly over the past decade (2012-2021). For countries
reporting data in 2022, a considerable retail price range was observed, with prices per ecstasy
tablet ranging from EUR 4 to EUR 19 (mean) and prices of MDMA powder from EUR 6 to EUR 50 per
gram. Some of the price disparity may be attributed to local factors, including distance to the
producing centres (Netherlands and Belgium), but statistical artefacts (e.g. small sample sizes) may
also be a factor.
In 2021, adult respondents to the EWSD reported paying a median of EUR 7.20 per ecstasy tablet
and a median of EUR 37.40 per gram for MDMA powder.
Analysis of darknet data reveals that the typical price paid is EUR 10 per gram of MDMA in tablets
(a tablet containing 144 milligrams of MDMA costs on average EUR 1.44) when purchasing less
than 50 tablets and EUR 10 per gram of crystals when purchasing less than 50 grams (see Section
Trafficking and distribution — online trade and distribution on darknet markets).
The increase of the quantity of MDMA present in ecstasy tablets noted in the 2012-2019 period was
not reflected in an increase in price per tablet (see Figure 6.5. Indexed trends in MDMA content
and price of ecstasy tablets, 2012-2022). In fact, it could be argued that MDMA in the form of
- 14 -

ecstasy tablets became cheaper between 2012 and 2019 as tablets containing larger quantities of
MDMA became increasingly available on the market (see Section The trend of large tablets
containing more MDMA may be reversing). In part, this may have occurred because of lower
production costs associated with the increasing availability of cheap designer precursor
alternatives from China around this time. The subsequent drop in MDMA content in tablets since
2019 does not appear to have been accompanied by a significant drop in price. While a slight
decrease in price was observed in 2022 for ecstasy tablets, this may not be statistically significant
or sustained in the coming years.
Figure 6.5. Indexed trends in MDMA content and price of ecstasy tablets, 2012-2022
Wholesale price data on MDMA is limited. For the six countries that reported data for 2022, prices
for 1 000 tablets varied from EUR 733 to EUR 7 228. In the Netherlands, in 2022, the price of
1 kilogram of (locally produced) MDMA crystals was reported at EUR 2 300, whereas 1 litre of
MDMA oil (which can be converted into crystals or powder, and subsequently ecstasy tablets) was
reported at EUR 1 550 per litre. Dutch law enforcement reports that during 2020, particularly
during lockdown periods associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, prices of MDMA oil dropped
drastically due to reduced demand. The effect appeared to have been short-lived, and by the end
of 2020 the price returned to pre-pandemic values (NPNL, 2022).
Profits generated by the sale of MDMA tablets are expected to be significant given the volume of
the trade. The limited literature on the subject suggests that, in 2019, the production cost of a
single tablet of MDMA in the Netherlands varied between EUR 0.25 and EUR 0.40. According to
Dutch Police, these tablets are sold to distributors at EUR 0.59 per unit (2022 values), who in turn
- 15 -

re-sell them at EUR 1.78 each (for quantities above 99 tablets). Consumers in the Netherlands will
typically pay EUR 4.50 per tablet but, as stated above, prices may reach as high as EUR 19 per
tablet in some European countries, and more in other regions of the world.
Prevalence and patterns of use
Historically, MDMA has been one of the most widely used illicit stimulant drugs in the European
Union, associated with patterns of consumption in the context of nightlife and other recreational
settings. The latest available data suggest an overall relatively stable level of consumption of
MDMA in the European Union, although there are variations at national level. An estimated
12.3 million adults in the European Union (aged 15-64), or 4.3 % of this age group, have used
MDMA at least once in their lifetime (EMCDDA, 2024).
Data on prevalence of use provide an indication of the structure, location and approximate size of
retail MDMA markets in the European Union.
Males make up the majority of MDMA consumers in the European Union, and are three times as
likely as females to report using MDMA. Males also make up the majority (68 %) of the relatively
few new entrants into drug treatment in 2021 for MDMA-related problems, and the majority of
patients (69 %) that experienced a hospital emergency associated with MDMA exposure in 2022
(see Section Harms and risks). This gender distribution is a commonly found pattern across other
substances.
MDMA use is more likely to be reported by young adults. Surveys conducted by 26 EU countries
between 2015 and 2023 suggest that 2.2 million young adults (aged 15 to 34) used MDMA in the
last year (2.2 % of this age group), and 1.1 million young adults aged 15 to 24 years are estimated
to have used MDMA in the last year (2.3 % of this age group) (see Figure 6.6. Key prevalence data
for MDMA/ecstasy use in Europe). The age distribution of those seeking help for MDMA-related
harms also reflects the higher prevalence of use among young adults: the majority of new
treatment entrants for MDMA-related problems are between 15 and 24 years old and the majority
of individuals presenting to hospital following an MDMA-related emergency are under 25.
According to survey data, the two largest MDMA consumer markets per capita in the European
Union are the Netherlands and Ireland, with 6 % or more people aged 15 to 34 reporting to have
consumed MDMA in the last year. General population surveys in many countries showed that
MDMA prevalence was declining from peak levels attained in the early to mid-2000s. Of the 13 EU
countries that undertook surveys since 2021 and provided confidence intervals, four reported
higher estimates than their previous comparable survey, nine reported stable estimates and one
reported a decrease. Where prevalence is higher, it may suggest that MDMA is no longer a niche
or subcultural drug limited to dance clubs and parties in those markets. Importantly, reported use
of the drug declined temporarily during periods of social distancing during the early phases of the
COVID-19 pandemic, coinciding with the closure of nightlife and the cancellation of events where
MDMA is typically consumed.
- 16 -

Wastewater data from 2023 complement the available data from general population surveys, drug
treatment and hospital emergency admissions; however, wastewater is not uniformly analysed
across the European Union. The data show that large quantities of MDMA are used in cities in
Belgium, Czechia, the Netherlands, Spain and Portugal. However, use varies considerably across
the study locations, typically being higher in larger cities compared to smaller ones. Looking at
longer-term trends in wastewater analysis, in most cases the levels increased between 2011 and
2016, and have since fluctuated. In 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, almost half of the cities
(24 of 49) reported a decrease in MDMA levels, with 18 reporting an increase. In 2021, 38 out of 58
cities reported a decrease. Of the 69 cities that have data for 2022 and 2023, 42 reported an
increase, 11 reported a stable situation and 16 a decrease. All of the 10 cities with data for both
2011 and 2023 had higher MDMA levels in 2023 than in 2011 (see Figure 6.6. Key prevalence data
for MDMA/ecstasy use in Europe).
Figure 6.6. Key prevalence data for MDMA/ecstasy use in Europe
This data explorer enables you to view our data on the prevalence of MDMA use by recall period
and age range. You can access data by country by clicking on the map or selecting a country
from the dropdown menu.
 
Notes
Prevalence data presented here are based on general population surveys submitted to the EMCDDA by national focal points. For the
latest data and detailed methodological information please see the Statistical Bulletin 2024: Prevalence of drug use.
Graphics showing the most recent data for a country are based on studies carried out between 2013 and 2023.
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, Greece, France, Italy and Hungary;
16-64 and 16-34 for Denmark, Estonia and Norway; 18-65 for Malta; 17-34 for Sweden.
Patterns of use
Polydrug use is common among MDMA users. Cannabis, alcohol and to a lesser extent cocaine,
amphetamine, methamphetamine, ketamine and GHB are consumed in combination with MDMA.
Cannabis is the most frequently used substance alongside MDMA, as reported by EWSD
respondents in 2018 (Gremeaux, 2022) while alcohol is present in the majority of hospital
emergencies associated with MDMA exposures (see Section Harms and risks).
Information gathered in the 2021 EWSD suggests that, on average, those who reported having
used MDMA in the last 12 months, consumed one ecstasy tablet or 0.4 grams of MDMA in crystal
or powders form each time they used the drug. While the number of tablets used per session has
not changed substantially from literature findings dating from several decades ago, today’s MDMA
users generally ingest higher quantities of the psychoactive substance than before (Gremeaux,
2022). This is because ecstasy tablets now contain more MDMA, on average, than they did in the
past (see Section Price and purity).
- 17 -

According to EWSD respondents, the main motivations for MDMA use are ‘to get high/for fun’ and
‘to socialise’. Wastewater data also reflect the predominant use of ecstasy in recreational settings,
with more than three quarters of cities reporting that higher loads of MDMA were present in
wastewater during the weekend than during weekdays in 2022. This is in accordance with
literature findings, which further suggest that the substance is typically consumed in discrete
episodes: over a 24-hour period (usually Friday or Saturday night) or over a whole weekend or
duration of a music festival (Cole, 2014). There are rare reports of extended use of ecstasy over
longer periods of time.
Market size estimate
Demand-based estimate
The basic approach used to estimate the value of the European MDMA market is to gauge the
quantity of MDMA consumed in Europe and multiply it by its price (EMCDDA, 2019a). The total
quantity of MDMA consumed in Europe is reached by multiplying the number of users by the
amount used, combining prevalence data from general population surveys and the amount used
from the EWSD.
Prevalence rates of the number of MDMA users, obtained from general population surveys, are
multiplied by 2021 Eurostat population data of the 15-64 age group. Similar to the MDMA market
size estimate published in 2019, it was only possible to distinguish two broad groups of MDMA
users from the general population surveys, based on frequency of use, which were mapped onto
the data available from the EWSD as follows:
infrequent users who used MDMA less than 11 times per year, approximated in the general
population surveys by those using in the last year but not in the last month (subtracting last
month prevalence from last year prevalence); and
frequent users who used MDMA on 11 or more days per year, approximated in the general
population surveys by those using in the last month.
As such, only last year prevalence and last month prevalence data are required to distinguish
these two groups. In the case of Belgium, Czechia, France, Luxembourg, Malta, Norway and
Portugal, no recent data for last month prevalence of MDMA were reported, so data were imputed.
The amount of MDMA used annually by these two different user groups was estimated using data
from the EWSD. The annual amounts used, in tablets, could be estimated for each survey
participant based on their responses to questions on the number of tablets used on a typical day,
multiplied by the number of days they said they used the drug in a year. In calculating the
amounts used, it was assumed that the maximum realistic amount to use in a day was five tablets;
those reporting higher values were excluded. Sharing tablets was not accounted for, which could
support higher values. For some countries (Belgium, Croatia, Denmark, France, Malta,
Netherlands, Norway and Türkiye) no data were available from the EWSD. In these cases, the
- 18 -

missing information was replaced with the mean, computed on the remaining countries.
The price data used was the average retail price for MDMA in the country concerned, drawn from
the EUDA’s annual data collection (see Section Price and purity). When more than one price point
was provided, the rule was to use the following: mode, median, mean, average of minimum and
maximum (min-max average), in order of availability.
By combining these data, the estimated annual value of the retail market for MDMA in Europe is at
least EUR 594 million, around 90 % of which can be attributed to frequent users. Estimates of
amounts used suggest that about 72.4 million ecstasy tablets were consumed in the European
Union in 2021.
Wastewater-based methods
Demand-based estimates may underestimate the size of drug markets for a number of reasons,
including difficulty reaching some groups of users, and underreporting of prevalence and
quantities used by respondents. Drug residue measurements in wastewater show promise as an
alternative method to estimate city-level drug consumption (van Nuijs et al., 2011), since the
amount found in waste is directly related to the quantity of drugs consumed by the population
served by the wastewater treatment plant. In a study commissioned for this analysis, wastewater
estimates were found to give different results, either higher or lower, than demand-based
estimates, depending on the drug concerned. Estimates based on wastewater data for MDMA
were noted to be more than double the amount estimated by the demand-based estimate.
When using wastewater data to estimate MDMA markets, the use of MDMA is based on the
excreted parent drug, rather than on an excreted metabolite (which is the case for some other
drugs, such as cocaine and heroin). This raises the possibility that this method may overestimate
use if large quantities of unused MDMA are discharged directly into the sewerage system (
Bettington et al., 2018; Guirguis, 2010).
It was possible to construct estimates of city-level MDMA market sizes by combining wastewater
data with country-level data for average retail purity and price. City-level market size estimates
were developed for Brussels, in Belgium, and five cities in Sweden (see Table 6.1. Estimated value
of MDMA consumed in selected European cities, 2020). While the population of Brussels is larger
than that of Stockholm, the amount of MDMA consumed is almost 30 % higher in Stockholm.
Furthermore, when factoring in the higher price of MDMA in Sweden, the market value in
Stockholm is about 3.5 times that of Brussels. While affected by limitations and uncertainties, this
type of data analysis shows great promise as a complementary information source to monitor the
size and changes in drug markets (Quireyns et al., 2023).
Table 6.1. Estimated value of MDMA consumed in selected European cities, 2020
Country City
Population Amount of pure drug consumed
(grams/year)
Amount of retail-level
drug consumed
(grams/year)
Value (EUR/year)
- 19 -

Belgium Brussels
953 987
34 137
262 596
1 376 002
Sweden Gävle
85 000
4 377
26 856
375 980
Sweden Sandviken
28 000
826
5 069
70 967
Sweden Söderhamn
14 500
343
2 105
29 470
Sweden Stockholm
860 800
55 223
338 790
4 743 058
Sweden Uppsala
200 000
6 541
40 126
561 765
Harms and risks
MDMA consumption is associated with an increase in the activity of serotonin and dopamine in the
brain, which may elicit feelings of euphoria, empathy and stimulation. Harms associated with
MDMA are typically modest and transient in their impact, but serious adverse events, including
those with fatal outcomes, may occur – especially when large quantities of MDMA are consumed.
MDMA use can lead to dangerous levels of hyperthermia and dehydration – often exacerbated by
the environments in which it is commonly consumed, such as crowded nightclubs or music
festivals. In addition, in those conditions, some people may drink too much water leading to
hyponatremia or water intoxication, which can be fatal (Parrott, 2013). MDMA use may be
particularly risky for individuals with pre-existing cardiac issues (Liechti, 2003). Long-term and
excessive use of the substance, however rare (see Section Patterns of use), has been associated
with neurotoxic effects and can result in impairments in cognitive function, depression, and
anxiety (Buchert et al., 2003; Parrott, 2013).
Acute MDMA toxicity is associated with serotonin syndrome (serotonin toxicity), whereby too much
serotonin is present in synapses in the brain, resulting in a combination of neuromuscular,
autonomic and psychologic symptoms (Foong et al., 2018), manifested in a range of mild to severe
symptoms. Mild symptoms can include restlessness and tremors, whereas more serious symptoms
may include severe hyperthermia and muscle stiffness, which have the potential to be lifethreatening (Makunts et al., 2022). The use of MDMA in high doses (for example in ecstasy tablets
with high MDMA content) and the use of MDMA alongside substances with serotonergic effects
such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (commonly prescribed as antidepressants), other
stimulants and opioids substantially increases the risk of serotonin syndrome. Nonetheless,
generally speaking, the number of drug-related deaths associated with exposure to MDMA is low
compared to other illicit substances, considering the number of people that consume the drug.
MDMA use continues to represent an important issue for prevention and harm reduction
messaging and interventions, not only because its toxicity can be fatal, but also because the
availability of high-strength and adulterated products increases the risk of adverse health
outcomes associated with its consumption (Roxburgh et al., 2021).
- 20 -

MDMA toxicity can result in hospital emergencies and fatalities,
but incidence is low
MDMA-related deaths are relatively infrequent. However, studies have suggested that an increase
has been observed in some countries. A review of MDMA-related mortality in Australia and three
European countries (Portugal, Finland and Türkiye) showed an increase in the number of fatalities
between 2011 and 2017 (Roxburgh et al., 2021). This increase coincided with a period of increased
purity and availability of MDMA in these markets, suggesting that changes in MDMA supply may
result in serious public health risks. A minority of these fatalities (13-25 %) were due to MDMA
toxicity alone, with multiple drug toxicity being more prevalent.
MDMA is reported in small numbers of drug-induced deaths, and in most countries less than 1 in
20 cases involve the drug. For example, in Germany, MDMA was mentioned in 1 in 25 fatal
overdoses in 2022, with most of the cases involving multiple drugs. Türkiye is an outlier, with
MDMA identified in almost 1 in 5 drug-induced deaths (46 out of 246 in 2022). The majority of
drug-induced deaths in Türkiye are among younger people, predominantly males, and are more
likely to involve stimulant drugs rather than opioids, compared with the European Union and
Norway.
In 2022, hospital emergencies associated with MDMA were registered in 19 of the 23 sentinel
centres that reported data to the EUDA through the Euro-DEN Plus project. The share of acute
drug-toxicity presentations involving MDMA increased as compared to other substances and the
previous year (or MDMA was reported for the first time) in 10 of the Euro-DEN hospitals. In 5
hospitals, this share decreased and in 4 it remained stable. Only in the sentinel hospitals in
Belgium, France and the Netherlands, was MDMA involved in more than 1 in 10 presentations.
A minority of hospitalisation cases were severe, and admission to the intensive care unit was
needed in 5 % of these presentations. Half of the centres reported no MDMA-related admissions to
the intensive care unit.
The median percentage of drug-related presentations involving MDMA was 4.7 % across the
reporting hospitals in 2022, and 2.8 % for presentations involving MDMA as the sole drug
reported. Alcohol was co-consumed across 67 % of all MDMA-related hospital emergencies, and
the other drugs commonly consumed alongside MDMA included cocaine, amphetamine,
methamphetamine, ketamine, heroin, GHB and cannabis.
Demographic insights obtained from drug-related emergencies are in general agreement with
other data sources (see Section Prevalence and patterns of use). Emergencies mostly occurred
among young adults aged below 25 years, which is the group most likely to consume MDMA.
Across the 24 hospitals reporting presentations with MDMA in 2022, the median proportion of
presentations aged below 25 years was 45 %. In contrast, the median proportion of presentations
aged over 45 years was 4 % across the 24 hospitals. Most MDMA-related hospital emergency cases
involved males, confirming trends in prevalence and patterns of use.
- 21 -

MDMA rarely cited as a reason for entering drug treatment in
Europe
At EU and country level, people seeking drug treatment for MDMA-related problems represent a
very small proportion of all clients entering drug treatment – typically less than 0.5 % of all new
entrants into drug treatment in any given year. In 2022, a total of 853 clients entered drug
treatment for the first time due to MDMA-related problems in 2022. Almost two thirds (503) of all
new treatment entrants were reported from three countries, Germany (213); France (169) and
Hungary (121). This may not reflect use patterns, but rather differences in the offer, legal
requirement and access to drug treatment between countries.
The total number of clients who entered treatment for the first time due to MDMA-related
problems has remained relatively stable in Europe over the years, with a slight decrease in 2020
and 2021, likely due to the disruptions to nightlife and treatment or monitoring activities at
treatment centres during the COVID-19 pandemic.
(1) The European Web Survey on Drugs (EWSD) is a voluntary, anonymous survey run by the EUDA and its partners targeting directly
people who use drugs who are 18 years old or older, and are living in one of the participating countries.
(2) Data reported to the Trans-European Drug Information project (TEDI) by drug-checking services in Austria, Belgium, France, Italy,
Luxembourg, Portugal, Slovenia and Spain.
(3) MDA is phenethylamine also known as ‘sass’ or 3,4-Methylenedioxyamphetamine. IUPAC name: 1-(2H-1,3-benzodioxol-5-yl)propan-2amine.
(4) 4-CMC is a cathinone also known as ‘clephedrone’. IUPAC name: 1-(4-chlorophenyl)-2-(methylamino)propan-1-one.
(5) PMMA is a structural analogue of PMA (para-methoxyamphetamine) and methamphetamine. IUPAC name: N-methyl-1-4-
(methoxyphenyl)-2-aminopropane.
References
Consult the list of references used in this module.
The data used to generate the infographics and charts on this page may be found below (CSV
format). Additional information, metadata and methodological notes may be found in the EU Drug
Market: MDMA source data entry in our data catalogue.
Please note that prevalence and patterns of use as well as wastewater data can be found in
European Drug Report 2024: Trends and Developments: source data.
MDMA markets data
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
- 22 -

Table EDMR2025-MDMA-15. Distribution of usual MDMA forms across countries
Table EDMR2025-MDMA-16a. MDMA samples analysed by drug-checking services
Table EDMR2025-MDMA-16b. MDMA samples analysed by drug-checking services by sample
form, 2019-2022
Table EDMR2025-MDMA-17. Indexed trend of the average percentage of ecstasy tablets
containing MDMA as the only scheduled substance
Table EDMR2025-MDMA-19. Indexed trends: price and MDMA content, retail (2011=100)
Table EDMR2025-MDMA-20a. Prevalence of MDMA ('ecstasy') use in Europe
Table EDMR2025-MDMA-20b.MDMA residues detected in wastewater in selected European
cities: most recent data
Table EDMR2025-MDMA-6.4 Quantity of MDMA, in milligrams, per ecstasy tablet (mean), 20042022
Prevalence of drug use data tables including general population surveys and wastewater
analysis (all substances)
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR24-GPS-1. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, based on most recent general population
surveys (2022 or most recent year)
Table EDR24-GPS-2. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, trends
Table EDR24-WW-1 Mean weekly measurements by targeted substance from wastewater
analysis in selected European cities in 2023, in
This PDF was generated automatically on 1/10/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/eu-drug-markets/mdma/retail-markets_en. Some errors may have occurred
during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 23 -