European 
Drug 
Report
2026

Notes for readers of this PDF version of the European Drug Report 
2026 
This edition was last updated on 9 June 2026. 
 
The European Drug Report is published by the European Union Drugs Agency 
(EUDA) in a digital-first format. While the report was traditionally available primarily 
in print and PDF, in recent years we have moved towards complementary web 
(HTML) and PDF products wherever feasible, as part of our commitment to 
accessibility, sustainability and quality. 
This approach allows us to: 
• streamline production processes and reduce the time between data collection 
and publication 
• improve accessibility by taking advantage of the strengths of HTML-based 
content 
• enhance quality through the use of data-driven graphics and the reduction of 
manual layout processes 
• support our open data objectives, as our digital-first products are built on open 
data technologies 
• reduce our environmental impact by eliminating print production 
• expand multilingual availability through more efficient digital workflows 
• increase reach by providing formats that are more easily indexed and used by 
search engines and AI tools 
• better understand user needs through enhanced web-based metrics 
At the same time, we recognise that PDFs remain important for many users, 
particularly for offline reading, searching within documents and research purposes. 
For these reasons, we are fully committed to continuing to provide PDF versions 
alongside all of our digital-first products. 
When using this PDF, please note the following: 
• The files have been generated automatically from the online version: 
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026_en 
• The content is intended to reflect the online version accurately. However, 
minor layout inconsistencies may occur. In case of doubt, the online version 
should be considered the reference version. 
• Most links in this document direct to the online version of the report. 
• Graphics in the PDF are static. For interactive features and full exploration of 
larger datasets, please consult the online version. 
• Page numbering restarts at the beginning of each chapter. 
 

Understanding Europe’s drug situation in 2026
– key developments (European Drug Report
2026)
The European Drug Report 2026 provides a snapshot of
Europe’s drug situation based on the latest data available.
Europe’s overlapping markets for established and new drugs
continue to evolve and are further complicated by the
integration of diverted and fake pharmaceutical products,
resulting in a wider range of risks, and challenging existing
response models as never before. Here we provide a brief
analytical commentary on key drug policy and practice issues
emerging from this year’s report.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
The drug situation in Europe in 2026 – an
overview
New risks to consumers linked to widespread drug availability
The availability of illicit drugs remains high in Europe, with
multiple substances on the market, often at high potency or
purity. Among these are novel substances, for which both
consumer and scientific knowledge of health risks is limited,
alongside more potent drugs, which carry an increased likelihood
and severity of harm. For drugs such as cannabis, diverse
products are now available, while for substance groups such as
opioids and stimulants, the variety of substances sold has
increased. Concerns continue about increasing risk levels,
especially among vulnerable and marginalised groups, including
poisonings and deaths from consuming highly potent drugs or
novel substances, possibly unknowingly, in drug mixtures and
- 1 -

tablets, particularly in the context of polysubstance use.
Geopolitical uncertainties, including conflicts and state destabilisation close to the European Union
and in other regions, and their effects on trade and the economy, have as yet an unclear impact on
the drug market and patterns of use in Europe. The growing complexity of the drug phenomenon
is also influenced by technological developments, changing drug trafficking routes and methods,
and evolving health risks from greater integration of the markets for illicit drugs and new
psychoactive substances. To evade legal and regulatory controls and targeted law enforcement
measures, drug producers continue to pursue a reactive replacement strategy, switching
precursor chemicals and selling newer drugs. Overall, this creates a challenging drug policy
context, potentially straining health and security response models and capacities. This dynamic
situation is addressed in the EU Drugs Strategic Framework , endorsed by the Council of the
European Union in March 2026. The framework includes the EU Drugs Strategy and the European
Commission’s Communication for an Action Plan against drug trafficking. Europe’s strategic
response includes a strengthened regulatory approach to the control of precursors and enhancing
coordination, cooperation and capacity building with international partners. In this context, the
EUDA continues to develop new tools and services to support Europe’s response to shifting risks
and emerging preparedness challenges.
More timely identification of new drugs and emerging trends is
vital for policy preparedness
The increasing overlap between the illicit drug and new
psychoactive substance markets, including fake and diverted
medicines, contributes to the potential for sudden shifts in the
substance types available at retail level. This can increase people’s
exposure to unpredictable health risks from unknowingly using
highly potent substances that appear on the market. Examples
include synthetic cannabinoids in e-liquids for vaping, new
psychoactive substances mis-sold as opioid or stimulant powders
and pills, and natural cannabis products combined with synthetic
compounds.
In this context, rapid identification of changes in drug markets
and patterns of use is increasingly important to ensure
policymakers, planners and practitioners are prepared. Alongside
established monitoring tools and in partnership with the Reitox network, the EUDA continues to
support the development of leading-edge systems to help deliver more timely analysis. These
include the European Web Survey on Drugs and city-level initiatives covering wastewater analysis,
hospital emergencies, syringe residue analysis, drug checking services and drug consumption
rooms. The EUDA Network of forensic and toxicological laboratories supports and complements
the EU Early Warning System, the European Drug Alert System and the EUDA health and security
threat assessment system to rapidly assess and warn of emerging problems. New EUDA data
- 2 -

collections are being developed on drug production incidents and drug precursors. Together, the
EUDA’s more timely multi-level monitoring tools will deepen our understanding of the drugs being
sold and the harms associated with specific substances and combinations, thereby enhancing
support for policy and response development.
Fluid drug trafficking methods challenge responses, straining
resources
Europe’s drug market is fed and shaped by agile global supply
chains, with illicit drugs and precursor chemicals trafficked from
different world regions. The infiltration of commercial supply
chains remains central to the bulk trafficking that sustains drug
markets, as evidenced by continued seizures of large drug
shipments in Europe’s ports. Commercial container shipments
remain vulnerable to exploitation by trafficking networks using
sophisticated physical and chemical concealment methods
combined with corruption, intimidation and violence against key
staff in the distribution chain. Following intensified law enforcement and customs operations at
major European ports and the creation of the European Ports Alliance , trafficking networks have
diversified their routes, methods and concealments, using multiple modi operandi. Increased use
of at-sea transfers via a variety of vessels, semi-submersibles, drones and deep concealment has
created a more unpredictable, fragmented and resource-intensive target for law enforcement and
customs. In addition, growing forms of technology-enabled trafficking such as the use of drones at
various levels of the illicit drug supply chain, including trafficking into prisons, are challenging to
respond to and underscore the need for enhanced intersectoral collaboration.
Criminal networks target vulnerable young people to operate
drug markets and perpetrate violence
The illicit drugs trade is associated with intimidation and violence
across Europe. While challenging to monitor, growing evidence
from a number of countries suggests that some young people, in
particular those already living in deprived and marginalised
communities, may be vulnerable to active recruitment into the
drugs trade. Of particular concern is the outsourcing of violence
to young people through violence-as-a-service arrangements.
This involves young people performing acts such as intimidation, assault and homicide under the
direction of criminals who provide the planning, weapons, transport and financing. The European
Union’s responses to this development include counter-recruitment frameworks supported by
digital safety partnerships with social media platforms, awareness-raising and digital-literacy
measures. Law enforcement responses have included network-informed disruption, targeting key
- 3 -

connectors and facilitators, closer integration with financial and internal security measures, and
coordinated action across EU Member States.
Europe’s changing drug problems highlight key role of
evidence-based prevention
Whether operating at the individual, family, school or community
level, both drug and crime prevention programmes typically focus
on building resilience and adaptive capacity before harms
emerge or escalate, enabling individuals and community systems
to anticipate and respond effectively to emerging challenges. This
is increasingly important as Europe’s drug problems evolve.
Regulatory, economic and environmental approaches can shape
substance availability, norms and decision-making. The
identification and implementation of evidence-based
interventions are important, alongside enhancing the prevention
workforce and embedding quality standards. The EUDA supports
the EU Member States through the European Prevention Curriculum (EUPC), providing a reference
framework for prevention capacity-building. It equips policymakers, coordinators and practitioners
with competencies to select, design, adapt and evaluate interventions according to quality
standards. Although focused on psychoactive substances and addictive behaviours, the EUPC
recognises the wider social, behavioural and environmental determinants shaping patterns of use
and adopts a broad public health perspective. As a follow-up to the EUPC, the EUDA supports the
POLITEA programme, which brings the evidence-based prevention approach to frontline criminal
justice actors. At national and EU level, investment in funding prevention activities will be a priority
for reducing the future burden of drug use and harms.
Reducing the burden of infectious diseases requires investment
in services and equipment
People who inject drugs are at greater risk of infection with
blood-borne viruses, including HIV and hepatitis C, B and A.
Historically, heroin has been the drug most closely associated
with injecting in Europe, but other drugs, including stimulants,
opioid agonist medications and new psychoactive substances, are
also injected, either in combination or alone. The use of
stimulants is associated with more frequent injecting and higherrisk sexual practices and has led to local HIV outbreaks in Europe.
In Europe, people who inject drugs have a high burden of chronic
viral hepatitis, and injecting remains the most common risk factor
for new HCV diagnoses. Although there is no vaccine for HCV, effective treatments do exist, and
- 4 -

some countries have shown that with at-scale provision of treatment and harm reduction
measures, HCV may be significantly reduced among people who inject drugs through a sufficiently
funded decentralised and integrated approach to prevention, testing and treatment. In 2025, a
hepatitis A outbreak, with person-to-person transmission, affected Czechia, Hungary, Austria and
Slovakia, with 39 deaths reported. In many cases, a significant number of infections were among
people experiencing homelessness and people who use drugs. Systematically offering HBV and
HAV vaccination in prisons as well as in community settings is supported by the joint ECDC-EUDA
toolkit and ECDC-EUDA guidance.
More generally, preventing and containing infectious disease transmission requires higher levels
of integrated prevention and harm reduction service provision. In some countries, funding
challenges and access barriers remain for responses, including infectious disease testing and
linkage to care, needle and syringe programmes and opioid agonist treatment.
The provision of appropriate harm reduction equipment is key to enabling people who use drugs
to reduce the risk of contracting blood-borne infections and lower their likelihood of injectionrelated injury and fatal overdose. A recent EUDA miniguide details this intervention, which is
typically provided to people who engage in high-risk drug use and may have limited or no access
to hygienic supplies for injection, smoking or inhalation. Alongside this, guidance is usually
provided on the correct use of the items, how to safely dispose of them after use and options for
transition to less risky routes of administration.
Cannabis and cannabinoid products are
changing, as are the problems
Wider range of cannabis products raises public health concerns
In Europe, illicit herbal cannabis and cannabis resin remain the
most widely available types of cannabis. An estimated 15.4 million
young European adults used the drug last year, and cannabis
now accounts for about one third of Europe’s drug treatment
admissions. For a number of reasons, the market is becoming
more complex. In several EU Member States, it is now possible to
buy or grow small amounts of cannabis legally. New cannabis
products are present on both the illicit drug market and the
commercial market. Products are appearing that contain low levels of THC, substances that may be
derived from the cannabis plant, such as cannabidiol (CBD), or both. Cannabis products
adulterated with potent synthetic cannabinoids can be found on the market; more recently, semisynthetic cannabinoids have also become more widely available. The availability of high-potency
extracts and edibles has been linked to acute drug-toxicity presentations in hospital emergency
departments. Potential harms are increased and their assessment and the design of appropriate
- 5 -

treatment are complicated by the wider availability of diverse and potent cannabis products. To
meet current and future needs, scaling up response capacity in the health services relating to
cannabis harms and treatment is a priority.
Europe’s illicit cannabis sources and supply routes are evolving
Cannabis trafficking networks are diversifying their routes and
methods. Spanish law enforcement has seized drones and
speedboats carrying cannabis, and in 2025, Belgian and Dutch
authorities reported increased cannabis seizures in shipping
containers at seaports, with seizures of around 21 tonnes in each
of the ports of Antwerp and Rotterdam, originating primarily
from Canada. In addition, cannabis is also now being trafficked to
Europe from the United States and, to a lesser extent, Thailand. It
seems likely that market dynamics in North America linked to
changes in regulatory status, including strong competition,
overproduction and lower prices, may incentivise European traffickers to source cannabis there. In
November 2025, the EUDA issued its first-ever alert via the European Drug Alert System,
highlighting potential harms from North American cannabis, due to high-potency products and
contamination with potentially hazardous pesticides. Whether these developments signal a
structural market shift or a temporary phenomenon remains uncertain, but they pose challenges
for authorities and underscore the need for targeted responses and further international
cooperation in this area.
Cannabis policy changes highlight role of monitoring and
evaluation
Some EU Member States have changed or are in the process of
reviewing their policy for cannabis use by adults. While differing
in scope and stage of implementation, new cannabis regulation
models being developed generally involve prevention measures,
limited home cultivation and monitoring and evaluation. Czechia,
Germany, Luxembourg and Malta permit limited home cultivation. Germany and Malta also allow
non-profit sales to members of regulated growing associations, while the Netherlands is
conducting an experiment with cannabis produced in regulated premises sold through
coffeeshops. These policy changes are in the early stages of implementation and vary across
countries. By the end of 2025, Germany and Luxembourg had published interim evaluation reports
considering early data on various health and security objectives. Further monitoring and
evaluation is expected to deliver policy-relevant insights. To assist policymakers in the field of
cannabis control, the EUDA is developing a cannabis policy toolkit. 
- 6 -

Health risks remain from obtainability and appeal of semisynthetic cannabinoids
Semi-synthetic cannabinoids are chemically modified forms of
natural cannabinoids. Following the international control of HHC
(hexahydrocannabinol), other semi-synthetic cannabinoids
became widely available, reflecting the ongoing cycle of new
substances being created to circumvent legal controls. Also of
concern is the production of semi-synthetic cannabinoids from
CBD, an issue under assessment by the EUDA. In 2024, at least
three sites involved in the production of THC or semi-synthetic
cannabinoids were dismantled in the European Union. Although
the effects of semi-synthetic cannabinoids in humans remain
poorly studied, reports suggest they are similar to those of THC, with adverse reactions ranging
from mild effects to severe poisoning, sometimes requiring treatment in hospital. Concerns exist
about their potential to trigger psychotic episodes and their abuse and dependence potential.
Alongside the risk of accidental overconsumption due to uncertainties in dosage, the rapid spread
of vapes and edibles, especially gummies, containing synthetic and semi-synthetic cannabinoids is
a public health concern as they may attract new, possibly younger, consumers.
Vaping as a mode of administration is on the rise
Most vaping or e-cigarette use involves nicotine-containing
products, but other substances may be involved. The 2024 ESPAD
study of 15- to 16-year-old school students identified e-cigarette
use as a concern. Findings show that e-cigarette use among
adolescents has increased substantially and is now a central
feature of youth substance use patterns in Europe. On average,
44% of the students in ESPAD countries reported having used
e‐cigarettes at least once in their lifetime. Overall, the upward
trend in e-cigarette use contrasts with declining levels of conventional cigarette smoking,
suggesting a shift in modes of nicotine delivery rather than a reduction in overall use. Early
initiation is notable, with a significant proportion reporting first use at age 13 or younger, raising
concerns about long-term dependence.
More generally, alongside the growth of vaping, many EU Member States have reported seizing eliquids containing synthetic and semi-synthetic cannabinoids. The wider availability of these
products creates various health risks, including inadvertent consumption and shifting exposure
due to potential batch-to-batch variation in the compounds. In addition, the adaptability of vaping
technology allows scope for expansion to other new psychoactive substances beyond
cannabinoids, including potent new synthetic opioids, with associated health risks.
- 7 -

Cocaine’s accessibility fuels health concerns
Widespread availability of cocaine driven by diverse trafficking
tactics
Globally, production of cocaine in South America is at an all-time
high, and wastewater data confirm that its use is still increasing in
many European cities. The seizure data is more complex: in 2024,
EU Member States reported more cocaine seizures but a lower
overall quantity seized, although the total remains higher than in
2022. While no firm conclusions can be drawn at this stage, data
suggest that amid a period of increased police and customs
activity, there has been a shift towards smaller or more
fragmented consignments and more varied trafficking routes and
methods. While bulk trafficking through seaports in commercial shipping containers still sustains
cocaine’s high availability, traffickers also use other methods to evade detection. There are more
reports of smaller ports being exploited, at-sea transfers via a variety of vessels, manned and
unmanned semi-submersibles, drones and complex physical and chemical forms of concealment.
Recent large at-sea seizures from merchant ships and speedboats and sophisticated concealments
in foodstuffs in air freight reflect this trend.
Many illicit cocaine processing sites are dismantled annually in Europe, mostly in the Netherlands,
but five other EU Member States dismantled processing sites in 2024, including facilities for
secondary extraction of cocaine chemically concealed in other materials, such as plastics. Cocaine
base and paste are trafficked in large quantities to Europe for processing into cocaine
hydrochloride. Overall, customs and law enforcement are responding to increasingly
unpredictable and fragmented trafficking routes, methods and concealments, alongside cocaine
production in Europe, creating a more resource-intensive operating environment, calling for
strengthened inter-agency and cross-border collaborations and partnerships.
Rising public health challenges from cocaine
Second only to cannabis, cocaine remains one of Europe’s most
widely used illicit drugs, and indicators such as municipal
wastewater analysis point to an increasingly wide geographical
and social distribution. In addition to episodic patterns of
consumption by more socially integrated consumers, cocaine is
also smoked and injected by high-risk and more marginalised
drug-using populations. Reports from drug consumption rooms
and syringe residue analysis reflect complex and high-risk
patterns of use, including injecting and use alongside opioids such as heroin.
- 8 -

Cocaine also ranks high among illicit drugs for its public health impact. It is a leading driver of
acute drug-toxicity emergencies in sentinel hospitals and is frequently implicated in drug-induced
deaths, accounting for approximately one quarter of cases in the most recent data available for 20
countries. The drug also features prominently in treatment demand, with indicators suggesting
that the problem is still expanding rather than stabilising. The current evidence supports
psychosocial interventions, including cognitive behavioural therapy and contingency management.
However, evidence remains insufficient to support any pharmacological treatment, although
research is ongoing on forms of agonist treatment. Integrated drug treatment and mental health
services are often lacking for clients in this area, and a scaling-up of tailored provision, while
potentially challenging to achieve, is indicated.
Crack cocaine raising concern in some cities
Crack cocaine remains a visible and potentially growing problem
in several European cities, although uneven monitoring makes it
difficult to determine to what extent this reflects wider
geographical spread, greater availability or improved reporting.
The available evidence points to concentrated use among highly
marginalised groups, particularly in contexts of homelessness,
socio-economic deprivation and polysubstance use, while more
socially integrated consumers may remain under-represented in
reporting. This development appears to be driven by high cocaine availability, the ease of local
conversion from powder cocaine and the varying dynamics of local retail-level drug markets.
Increased crack cocaine availability can fuel severe health harms, open drug scenes, repeated
hospital emergency presentations and generally chaotic living conditions, which can result in those
affected experiencing fragmented care and treatment trajectories. In some cities, there have been
reports of violence driven by local retail drug-market dynamics, placing pressure on health, social
and public safety responses. The latest data indicate that, although remaining relatively low, the
number of people entering treatment for crack-related problems is increasing. Moreover, almost a
quarter are women, underscoring the need for gender-responsive service provision. Some drug
consumption facilities support safer crack cocaine consumption, with sites in 12 cities reporting
crack consumption episodes in the first half of 2025. Overall, crack cocaine use is placing
increasing strain on harm reduction and treatment providers as they respond to the needs of a
group experiencing serious health and social problems.
- 9 -

Synthetic drugs pose diverse health concerns
Responding to evolving synthetic drug production and designer
precursors
Illicit drug production threatens public health and safety, creating
risks for law enforcement, first responders and the environment.
Synthetic drug production facilities dismantled in the European
Union in 2024 were manufacturing many different substances,
including amphetamine, methamphetamine, synthetic cathinones
and MDMA. Some illicit laboratories produce multiple synthetic
stimulants with similar precursor and manufacturing equipment
requirements. Innovation in production processes is evident from
seizures of chemicals used to manufacture the precursors needed to produce synthetic drugs. The
use of a wider range of chemicals to produce new substances and pursue different synthesis
processes creates a shifting and complex challenge for customs, law enforcement agencies and
regulators. Illicit drug producers continually switch to uncontrolled chemicals to evade
international precursor controls. Reflecting this cycle, large quantities of glycidic derivatives of
BMK and PMK, used in the manufacture of amphetamines and MDMA, were seized in 2024.
Preliminary 2025 data indicate that new BMK alternatives have emerged, which will be the subject
of EUDA risk assessments in 2026. These ‘designer precursors’ are chemically similar to scheduled
precursors, purpose-made to circumvent controls, and usually have no known legitimate use. The
European Commission’s proposed new precursor control regulation enhances the EUDA’s
monitoring and risk assessment role and establishes an EU-wide drug precursors repository,
strengthening the response to illicit drug production and helping halt the importation of
precursors.
Increased supply of synthetic cathinones driven by imports and
production
Synthetic cathinones have become established in parts of Europe
as affordable alternatives for illicit stimulants such as
amphetamine and cocaine. While inadvertent consumption in
drug mixtures and tablets remains a concern, cathinones are
sought intentionally as affordable alternatives. EU Early Warning
System data indicate that N‐ethylnorpentedrone (NEP), now
controlled under EU law, was being mis-sold as 3-MMC, another
cathinone, in 2025, causing unintended consumption and
poisonings.
- 10 -

Data from drug checking services suggest that synthetic cathinones are sought intentionally,
although the cathinone found in the sample often differs from the one believed to have been
purchased. This reflects the dynamic nature of cathinone production and creates shifting health
risks. Reported seizures and imports of synthetic cathinones in the European Union increased in
the latest reporting, while large seizures of precursors and the dismantling of a large number of
illicit laboratories suggest synthetic cathinone production remains significant in Europe,
particularly in Poland. There are also signs it may be shifting towards more potent compounds,
with an increasing number of sites producing alpha-PVP (α-pyrrolidinovalerophenone). This
substance has a particularly high potency and the potential to trigger agitation, paranoia,
aggression and psychosis. In 2026, the EUDA risk-assessed multiple synthetic cathinone precursors
to support measures to inhibit their supply.
Growing health risks from ketamine’s integration into drug
markets
Ketamine is a legitimate medical anaesthetic and analgesic, which
is also misused, often in nightlife settings, and is commonly
snorted in powder form. The drug appears to be increasingly
available in Europe. Among respondents to the 2024 European
Web Survey on Drugs, a non-representative survey, 14% of those
who had used drugs in the last year reported having used
ketamine, mainly in the context of polysubstance use, with other
drugs and alcohol. Wastewater monitoring provides further signals of wider diffusion, with the
majority of European cities with sufficient data reporting increased levels of ketamine residues
between 2024 and 2025. Patterns of combined use are also reflected in acute harms data, with
cocaine being the substance most often reported in combination with ketamine in acute toxicity
presentations to Euro-DEN sentinel hospitals in 2024. There are also reports of ketamine mixed
with stimulants in drug cocktails known as ‘pink cocaine’. However, data from drug checking
services show that most ketamine samples tested contained only the intended drug, indicating
that combining ketamine with other drugs may often be intentional. A recent EUDA report
indicates that most ketamine seized in Europe originates from licit production in India and is
imported in bulk to EU Member States, mainly Germany, then diverted to the illicit market.
Ketamine is commonly snorted and is associated with dose-dependent acute and chronic harms,
notably bladder damage from intensive use. The number of clients entering specialised treatment
for problems related to ketamine use remains low, although it quadrupled in the last five years of
reporting. Treatment access and referral pathways to specialised care remain a challenge for
people with ketamine-related health problems, calling for better access to appropriate services
and targeted prevention and risk communication for those who may be unaware of the health
risks related to ketamine use. Enhanced information sharing between regulatory and law
enforcement agencies should focus on identifying and addressing vulnerabilities within legitimate
supply chains, while considering the potential for displacement, including a shift to illicit
- 11 -

production, arising from targeted supply reduction measures.
Opioid harms continue to challenge responses
Polysubstance use and diverse opioids fuel drug-induced
mortality
A minimum estimate of 7 600 deaths directly related to the use of
drugs occurred in the European Union in 2024. Most involved the
use of more than one substance, reflecting increasingly complex
drug consumption patterns, including polysubstance use.
Opioids, usually in combination with other substances, remain
the group of substances most implicated in drug-induced deaths.
Opioids other than heroin, including methadone, buprenorphine,
highly potent synthetic opioids and pain-relief medicines
containing opioids, are associated with a substantial share of overdose deaths in some countries.
Highly potent synthetic opioids such as nitazenes have been associated with outbreaks of fatal and
non-fatal poisonings in Europe. However, except in some Baltic countries, these drugs are not
prominent in the routine data at EU level. Nonetheless, sudden drug market shifts can lead to the
rapid emergence of other highly potent synthetic opioids, such as orphines. The EUDA coordinates
a network of forensic and toxicological laboratories to increase analytical capacity and provide
frontline insights. This supports rapid information exchange and risk assessment, aiding national
authorities undertaking monitoring activities.
On the response side, the primary strategy is to provide opioid agonist treatment to those in need.
From a public health perspective, some recent concerns have arisen in EU Member States around
threats to the availability of buprenorphine-based opioid agonist treatment, which is received by
about 36% of opioid agonist treatment clients. Medication access difficulties could complicate
treatment continuity, raising issues around the availability of equivalent formulations, as well as
possible risks associated with patients needing to switch products. Additionally, a growing body of
evidence suggests that increasing the availability of opioid antagonists such as naloxone can help
prevent fatal opioid overdoses. While naloxone is used in clinical settings in all countries, takehome naloxone programmes were reported in 19 European countries by 2025, although
availability varies within and between countries, highlighting the challenge that remains in
ensuring naloxone access is sufficient across settings and groups
- 12 -

Potent new synthetic opioids continue to appear in Europe
New synthetic opioids are often highly potent, posing an
increased risk of life‐threatening poisoning. In the last five years,
three quarters of EU Member States have reported a nitazene,
and over a third have reported an orphine. The EU Early Warning
System on new psychoactive substances has received increasing
reports of fake medicines containing nitazene opioids. While
predominantly used by people engaged in high‐risk opioid use,
there are also concerns that such tablets may spread among
populations without opioid tolerance, including young people. In addition, there are increased
reports of orphines, likely linked to the imposition in July 2025 of a blanket ban on nitazenes in
China. Orphines have been linked to acute non-fatal poisonings and deaths in EU Member States.
While limited pharmacological data are available, orphines are structurally similar to brorphine, a
potent opioid, suggesting respiratory depression is the key health risk. The EUDA began reviews of
cychlorphine and spirochlorphine in spring 2026, and the findings will be used by the Commission
to decide whether formal risk assessments are required. Strengthening provision of treatment and
harm reduction services at appropriate scale to meet the needs of high-risk populations is key to
limiting current and future harms from new potent synthetic opioids.
Deaths from fentanyl use underscore the need for vigilance
Fentanyl, a highly potent synthetic opioid, has for many years
been associated with overdose deaths in Europe, although the
geographical spread has been limited to a small number of
countries. In terms of supply, fentanyl is sometimes a diverted
medicinal product and sometimes illegally produced. Between
2024 and 2025, fentanyl was involved in over 100 drug-induced
deaths in Bulgaria, while multiple kilograms of material
containing fentanyl were seized. The repeated large seizures,
geographical spread and unidentified sources of fentanyl production and trafficking increase the
potential for further fentanyl problems in Bulgaria and beyond. Four seizures of the fentanyl
precursor N-boc-4-piperidone, totalling 30 kilograms, were reported by Spain and the Netherlands
in 2024. It remains unknown whether the shipments were destined for EU production facilities or
transiting to non-EU locations. Enhancing access to opioid agonist treatment, needle and syringe
programmes and take-home naloxone remains key to addressing current opioid problems and
ensuring preparedness and resilience against opioid market shifts.
- 13 -

Europe’s resilient heroin market is fuelled by opium stockpiles
and diversifying production
The relative stability of heroin availability in Europe is partly
attributed to the existence of large stockpiles in Afghanistan,
estimated at around 12 000 tonnes of opium in 2025. Advanced
processing and adulteration practices and tactical supply
management by trafficking networks have also sustained heroin
availability, despite reduced opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan. This makes a heroin shortage
in Europe less likely in the short to medium term. Large heroin seizures are still occurring in
countries on key trafficking routes, and multiple sites for cutting and packaging heroin were
dismantled in the European Union in 2024. Pakistan, particularly the province of Balochistan,
bordering Afghanistan and home to major seaports linked to drug trafficking to Europe, has also
emerged as a source of opium and heroin, with satellite imagery analysis suggesting over
9 000 hectares of opium poppy cultivation in 2025, potentially rivalling Afghanistan’s output.
Elsewhere in Asia, Myanmar’s opium poppy cultivation reached a 10-year peak of more than
45 000 hectares in 2025. European countries will need to remain vigilant for signs of market shifts
over the next years, including increased synthetic opioid or stimulant use.
- 14 -

At a glance
At a glance – estimates of drug use in the European Union
Cannabis
Adults (15-64)
Last year use
24.9 million
8.7 %
Lifetime use
89.5 million
31.3 %
Young adults (15-34)
Last year use
15.4 million
15.3 %
National estimates of use
in last year (%)
Cocaine
Adults (15-64)
Last year use
4.3 million
1.5 %
Lifetime use
18 million
6.3 %
Young adults (15-34)
Last year use
2.5 million
2.5 %
National estimates of use
in last year (%)
- 15 -

MDMA
Adults (15-64)
Last year use
3.1 million
1.1 %
Lifetime use
14.3 million
5 %
Young adults (15-34)
Last year use
2.4 million
2.4 %
National estimates of use
in last year (%)
Amphetamines
Adults (15-64)
Last year use
2 million
0.7 %
Lifetime use
11.7 million
4.1 %
Young adults (15-34)
Last year use
1.4 million
1.4 %
National estimates of use
in last year (%)
Heroin and other opioids
High-risk
opioid users
855 000
505 000
opioid users
received agonist
treatment in 2024
Drug
treatment
requests
Principal drug in
about 21 % of all
drug treatment
requests in the
European Union
21 %
Fatal
overdoses
Opioids were found
in 66 % of fatal
overdoses
66 %
- 16 -

The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-At-a-glance-1. Drug use in the EU in 2024, at a glance (amphetamines, cannabis,
cocaine, MDMA)
Table EDR26-At-a-glance-2. Heroin and other opioids in the EU in 2024, at a glance
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/drug-situation-in-europe-up-to-2026_en. Some
errors may have occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting
the web page.
- 17 -

Drug supply, production and precursors – the
current situation in Europe (European Drug
Report 2026)
Analysis of the supply-related indicators for commonly used
illicit drugs in the European Union suggests that availability
remains high across all substance types. On this page, you
can find an overview of drug supply in Europe based on the
latest data, supported by the latest time trends in drug
seizures and drug law offences, together with 2024 data on
drug production and precursor seizures.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
High drug availability in Europe sustained by
tactical production and trafficking shifts
Drug supply and the market
Market and other indicators for the most commonly used substances suggest drug availability
remains high in EU countries. A broad range of drugs are widely available, often at high potency or
purity, elevating risks to health. These include novel substances, where both consumer and
scientific knowledge about the health risks may be limited. For some drugs, such as cannabis,
diverse products are being sold, while for others, including opioids and stimulants, the variety of
substances available has increased. Concern exists about growing risks, especially for vulnerable
and marginalised groups. These risks include poisonings and deaths from consuming highpotency or novel substances, possibly unknowingly, in drug mixtures and tablets, especially in the
context of polysubstance use.
- 1 -

Fluid drug trafficking methods challenge responses, straining
resources
Europe’s drug market is fed and shaped by agile global supply chains. Countries in South America,
West and South Asia and North Africa remain major sources for illicit drugs entering Europe, such
as cocaine, heroin and cannabis resin, while China and India remain important source countries
for new psychoactive substances. India is an important source of substances such as synthetic
cathinones and ketamine, which are also produced within Europe. Drug precursors and related
chemicals are also often reported to be sourced from China. In addition, Canada and the United
States, which have commercial cannabis markets, are significant sources of cannabis products.
While the overall quantities of cocaine and cannabis seized in Europe decreased in 2024, the
infiltration of commercial supply chains remains key to the bulk trafficking that sustains the scale
of drug markets, reflected in the continued seizures of large drug shipments in Europe’s ports.
Commercial container shipments remain vulnerable to exploitation by trafficking networks using
sophisticated concealment methods combined with corruption, intimidation and violence against
key staff in the distribution chain.
In the face of intensified law enforcement and customs operations at major European ports and
efforts to enhance resilience through the European Ports Alliance, trafficking networks have
diversified the routes, methods and concealments they employ, using multiple modi operandi (
Figure 1.1). Drugs are trafficked over land, sea and air, including through commercial and private
means of transportation, letters and parcels. Increased use of at-sea transfers via a variety of
vessels, semi-submersibles, drones and deep concealment has created an increasingly
unpredictable, fragmented and resource-intensive target for law enforcement and customs. In
2026, Spanish authorities in conjunction with international partners seized 10 tonnes of cocaine
concealed in salt (Figure 1.2). Such incidents, and growing forms of technology-enabled trafficking
such as the use of drones, are demanding to respond to and require a renewed approach to keep
pace with the tactics of traffickers. This dynamic situation is addressed in the EU Drugs Strategic
Framework, endorsed by the Council of the European Union in March 2026. The framework
includes the EU Drugs Strategy and the European Commission’s Communication for an Action Plan
against drug trafficking. It also includes the updated rules for monitoring and controlling drug
precursors, and implementing ProtectEU, a new European internal security strategy. The EUDA
continues to develop new tools and services to support Europe’s response to shifting risks and
emerging preparedness challenges.
- 2 -

Figure 1.1. Examples of drug trafficking methods previously reported by law enforcement in
Europe
- 3 -

Figure 1.2. Cocaine seizures at sea
Note: Seizures by the Spanish National Police (left) and Spanish Tax Agency, Civil Guard and National Police (right); the Maritime Analysis
Operations Centre-Narcotics collaborated in both operations.
Shifting opium production dynamics and stockpiles fuel
European heroin market
The ban on drug production in Afghanistan introduced by the Taliban in 2022 led to a sharp
decline in both poppy cultivation and opium production, with estimates indicating a 95% drop in
cultivation and production in 2023 and similarly low levels persisting in 2024. This has raised
concerns regarding the potential for a heroin shortage in Europe and increased availability of
various other drugs, including synthetic opioids. However, recent EUDA-funded research indicates
that despite continued low levels of poppy cultivation in 2025, a heroin shortage in Europe remains
unlikely in the short to medium term. Mitigating factors, including improvements in heroin
processing methods, adulteration practices and the existence of major opium stockpiles have
maintained the availability of heroin in Afghanistan and have so far limited the impact on
European heroin markets. Importantly, in a structural shift in regional opiate production dynamics,
Pakistan has become a large producer, essentially in the province of Balochistan, directly south of
Afghanistan and home to Gwadar port, where many Afghan farmers and ‘opium cooks’ have
relocated to lease land and operate illicit heroin laboratories. The relocation of Afghan farmers and
‘opium cooks’ to this area places production close to the Makran coast, a long‐established
maritime drug trafficking corridor connecting the region to consumer markets globally, including
in Europe. In 2025, Balochistan’s opium output may rival Afghanistan’s, potentially reducing the
overall impact of the Taliban ban on regional flows of opiates (see Understanding Europe’s drug
situation in 2026). Nonetheless, four years after the imposition of the Taliban ban, European
countries should remain alert to any signs of changes on heroin markets, especially increased
availability and use of synthetic opioids or stimulants (see also Heroin – the current situation in
Europe).
- 4 -

Diverse illicit drug production in Europe threatens health and
the environment
Europe remains a significant production region for illicit drugs, with EU Member States annually
dismantling thousands of illicit production sites. Most of these relate to cannabis cultivation for
domestic markets, while the remainder are primarily involved in the production of synthetic drugs
for EU and non-EU markets.
Illicit drug production threatens public health and safety. It creates risks for law enforcement
responders, people consuming drugs and by causing environmental damage, can harm local
communities near production or chemical waste dumping sites. The illicit drug production facilities
dismantled in the European Union in 2024 were manufacturing many different substances,
including amphetamine, methamphetamine, synthetic cathinones, MDMA, and processing of
cocaine and heroin (Figure 1.3). Smaller sites likely supply local markets and, occasionally, darknet
markets. Larger sites supply both local and non-EU markets and are mostly detected in Belgium
and the Netherlands, but also in Poland, Germany and Spain. Some laboratories can produce
multiple substances, such as synthetic stimulants with similar precursor chemical and
manufacturing equipment requirements. Commenting authoritatively on the escalation of illicit
drug production in Europe is difficult due to monitoring challenges, including data availability
issues and uncertainty regarding the output capacity of production sites.
Figure 1.3. Synthetic cathinone production facility with 185 kilograms of 4-CMC
(clephedrone) seized, Pyskowice, Poland, 2024
Note: Seizure by the Central Bureau of Police Investigation.
Cocaine production
The detection of more and sometimes sizeable facilities for cocaine production, extraction, cutting
and packaging in recent years indicates innovative methods are used to traffic cocaine to Europe.
Large amounts of cocaine hydrochloride are processed in Europe, mostly in Belgium, the
- 5 -

Netherlands, Spain and Portugal, from intermediary products (coca paste and cocaine base)
trafficked from South America. Seizures of ethyl acetate, a solvent used in cocaine processing,
reached 42 500 litres in 2024, further indicating that cocaine extraction and processing continue at
scale.
Synthetic drug production
Innovation in production processes is also evident from seizures of chemicals that can be used to
manufacture the precursor chemicals needed to produce synthetic drugs. The use of a wider range
of chemicals to produce new substances and pursue different synthesis processes creates a
shifting and complex challenge for customs, law enforcement agencies and regulators.
Alongside large imports of synthetic cathinones into Europe from China and India, the illicit
production of various internationally controlled synthetic cathinones (e.g. 3-MMC, 4-MMC, alphaPVP) has for many years been reported by some European countries, primarily Poland. The EUDA
has risk assessed precursor chemicals for manufacturing synthetic cathinones, such as
propiophenones, that are not currently internationally controlled as part of EU action to halt their
use in illegal drug production.
Signals suggest that semi‐synthetic cannabinoids and certain synthetic cannabinoids are also
produced in European countries. Concern has arisen regarding the use of CBD as a precursor for
the production of semi-synthetic cannabinoids, such as HHC variants.
Illicit drug producers continue to exploit unscheduled
chemicals to evade detection
Illicit drug producers continually switch to uncontrolled chemicals to evade international precursor
controls. Reflecting this ongoing cycle, large amounts of BMK and PMK glycidic derivatives were
seized in 2024 (39.3 tonnes) and preliminary 2025 data indicate that new BMK alternatives have
emerged (e.g. methyl 4-phenylacetoacetate and ethyl 4-phenylacetoacetate), with Spain reporting
seizures of 2 tonnes of these uncontrolled chemicals. The EUDA will perform risk assessments on
these chemicals in 2026. The European Commission’s proposed new precursor control regulation
enhances the EUDA’s monitoring role and establishes an EU-wide drug precursors repository.
Once adopted by the Council and Parliament, the overhauled precursors legislation should
strengthen controls at the European Union’s external borders and within the EU internal market. It
should also facilitate the creation of generic (whole chemical families) bans of ‘designer
precursors’, which are chemical variants of scheduled substances with no known legitimate use,
although allowing the possibility of research use.
- 6 -

Key data and trends
Drug supply trends
Indexed trends, overall, show that the quantities of drugs seized in the European Union
increased between 2014 and 2024, particularly in the past 7 years (Figure 1.4). 
Figure 1.4. Drug seizures in the European Union – quantity of drugs seized, indexed trends
(2014 = 100)
The indexed trends presented reflect relative changes in drug seizures over a 10-year period but give no indication of the actual
amounts.
MDMA tablets were converted to mass-equivalents by assuming a mass of 0.25 grams MDMA per tablet.
Between 2014 and 2024, the largest increases in quantities seized were for methamphetamine
(1 019%), cocaine (471%), MDMA (386%), amphetamine (150%) and herbal cannabis (79%).
EU Member States reported an estimated 1 million seizures in 2024, with cannabis products
accounting for 68% of all reported seizures (Figure 1.5 and Figure 1.6).
- 7 -

Figure 1.5. Drug seizures in the European Union – number of reported drug seizures,
breakdown by drug, 2024 (percent)
- 8 -

Figure 1.6a. Drug seizures in the European Union – number of seizures in 2024
Figure 1.6b. Drug seizures in the European Union – quantity seized in 2024 (tonnes)
Note: MDMA tablets were converted to mass-equivalents by assuming a mass of 0.25 grams MDMA per tablet.
- 9 -

Between 2014 and 2024, the number of seizures of cannabis resin decreased by 11%, herbal
cannabis by 34% and heroin by 39% (Figure 1.7). Over the same period, the number of seizures
increased for methamphetamine (234%), MDMA (66%), cocaine (42%) and amphetamine (9%).
Figure 1.7. Drug seizures in the European Union – number of drug seizures, indexed trends
(2014 = 100)
Trends in drug law offences
In 2024, EU Member States reported an estimated 1.6 million drug law offences, an increase of
38% since 2014. More than three quarters of the offences (76% or 1.2 million) relate to use or
possession for personal use.
Of the estimated 1.6 million drug law offences, the drug mentioned in the offence is reported in
just under 871 000 offences, of which 706 000 were for possession or use, 161 000 were for
supply-related offences and 4 000 were for other types of offences (Figure 1.8).
- 10 -

Figure 1.8. Drug law offences – number of offences, supply and use/possession, 2024
Note: Data for offences for which the drug involved has been reported. Cocaine includes offences related to cocaine and crack.
In 2024, cannabis accounted for 477 000 (68%) of the use or possession offences for which the
drug is known and accounted for around 74 000 (46%) of the drug supply offences.
Higher numbers of offences related to cocaine and MDMA, both for possession and supply,
were reported in 2024 than in 2014. Over the same period, fewer offences were reported for
methamphetamines, heroin and cannabis, both for drug possession and drug supply related
offences (Figure 1.9 and Figure 1.10).
- 11 -

Figure 1.9. Drug law offences – possession/use offences, indexed trends (2014 = 100)
Figure 1.10. Drug law offences – supply offences, indexed trends (2014 = 100)
EU production and precursors data for 2024
The scheduling of a range of alternative chemicals as precursors under international control
caused a sharp reduction in the quantity of chemicals used in the production of synthetic drugs
seized in the European Union: from a peak of 178 tonnes in 2023 to 64 tonnes in 2024. About
54 tonnes were seized annually in the last decade (Figure 1.11).
- 12 -

Figure 1.11a. Quantity of key precursors and non-scheduled chemicals seized in the EU (20122024)
Figure 1.11b. Quantity of key precursors and non-scheduled chemicals seized in the
European Union in 2024 (kilograms), by association with drug production
- 13 -

Figure 1.11c. Quantity of key precursors and non-scheduled chemicals seized in the European
Union in 2024 (litres), by association with drug production
Source: European Drug Precursors Database, 2025
Cannabis: EU Member States reported 7 300 seizures of cannabis plants, amounting to
2.1 million individual plants and 21 tonnes in 2024 (2.3 million plants and 11 tonnes in 2023). In
2024, around 4 000 illicit cannabis cultivation sites were dismantled in 11 EU Member States.
In 2024, at least three illicit sites involved in the production of THC or semi-synthetic
cannabinoids were dismantled, two in the Netherlands and one in Poland.
Heroin: Twenty heroin production (cutting and packaging) sites were dismantled in EU Member
States in 2024 (15 in the Netherlands, 4 in Czechia, 1 in Italy). Czechia reported dismantling two
morphine sites and the Netherlands reported two sites producing lean, a codeine-containing
liquid. Three seizures of the heroin precursor chemical acetic anhydride were reported in the
European Union in 2024, two by the Netherlands, amounting to 15 038 litres (740 litres in 2023).
Worldwide, seizures of acetic anhydride have been declining substantially since 2019. In 2024,
the Netherlands reported an additional theft of 27 000 litres of acetic anhydride.
Cocaine: Six EU Member States reported dismantling 42 sites related to cocaine production in
2024 (34 in 2023): the Netherlands (24), Spain (7), Portugal (4), Belgium (4), Italy (2), Germany (1).
One production site was dismantled in Türkiye. Potassium permanganate seizures decreased in
2024 to 17 kilograms (2 082 kilograms in 2023).
Amphetamine: In 2024, 9 EU Member States reported dismantling 110 amphetamine
laboratories (93 in 2023): the Netherlands (33), Germany (28), Poland (29), Belgium (11),
Austria (2), Sweden (3), Italy (2), Bulgaria (1) and Spain (1). One site related to amphetamine
production was dismantled in Norway.
Methamphetamine: Ten EU Member States reported dismantling 252 methamphetamine
laboratories in 2024 (250 in 2023): Czechia (184), the Netherlands (23), Bulgaria (18), Germany
- 14 -

(5), Poland (11), Spain (4), Slovakia (2), Belgium (2), Austria (2) and Romania (1). Five sites were
dismantled in Türkiye. Czechia also reported dismantling pseudoephedrine (19) and ephedrine
(1) sites. Seizures of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine amounting to 6 404 kilograms (both
powders and tablets) were reported by 11 EU Member States in 2024 (7 847 kilograms by 16 EU
Member States in 2023).
BMK: Amphetamine and methamphetamine can be produced from BMK, a controlled precursor
that can itself be manufactured from alternative chemicals. In 2024, the Netherlands reported
dismantling 27 laboratories producing BMK. In 2024, 3 732 litres of BMK (5 453 litres in 2023)
and 21.6 tonnes of substances (66.2 tonnes in 2023) that can be used to produce BMK were
seized in EU Member States. These seizures included 21.6 tonnes of glycidic derivatives of BMK
(66.1 tonnes in 2023), 35 kilograms of MAPA (43 kilograms in 2023) and 47 kilograms of APAA
and APAAN (1.3 kilograms of APAAN in 2023). Seizures of tartaric acid, used to retrieve the most
potent form of methamphetamine (d-methamphetamine, used for producing ‘crystal meth’)
from mixtures produced by BMK methods, amounted to 7.5 tonnes in 2024 (10.9 tonnes in
2023) and were reported by the Netherlands, Spain and Germany.
MDMA: Four EU Member States reported dismantling 59 MDMA laboratories in 2024 (36 in
2023): 47 in the Netherlands (32 in 2023), 4 in Belgium (4 in 2023), 7 in Spain and 1 in Germany.
In 2024, the Netherlands reported dismantling 24 laboratories producing the controlled MDMA
precursor PMK. Seizures of MDMA precursors decreased to 23.9 tonnes in 2024 (64.1 tonnes in
2023). Seizures of the MDMA precursor PMK and its glycidic derivatives amounted to
23.9 tonnes in 2024 (63.1 tonnes in 2023). Seizures of MAMDPA, which peaked at 4.5 tonnes in
2021, were not reported in 2024, and only 5 kilograms of IMDPAM was reported seized in 2024
(450 kilograms in 2023).
Cathinones: Four EU Member States reported 63 synthetic cathinone production sites in 2024:
47 in Poland (40 in 2023), 11 in the Netherlands (8 in 2023), 3 in Germany (2 in 2023), 1 in Latvia
and a multi-drug production site in Lithuania. All but one of the sites were producing single
drugs: 4-MMC (19 sites), 3-CMC (15), 4-CMC (22), alpha-PVP (5), methcathinone (3). The multidrug site was producing several cathinones (2-MMC, 3-CMC, 4-CMC). Seizures of synthetic
cathinone precursors amounted to 2 620 kilograms in 2024 (2 153 kilograms in 2023), mainly in
the Netherlands (2 518 kilograms) and Germany (101 kilograms).
Synthetic opioids: In 2024, one large clandestine methadone production facility was identified
in Poland (Figure 1.12), which led to the seizure of 195 kilograms of crystal methadone. Eight
sites where methadone and synthetic cathinones were produced side by side were discovered
in Poland and Ukraine in 2024. At the end of 2024, four seizures of the fentanyl precursor N-boc4-piperidone totalling 30 kilograms were reported by Spain and the Netherlands.
- 15 -

Figure 1.12. Illicit methadone production sites dismantled in Poland, August 2024
Note: Seizure by the Central Bureau of Police Investigation, Poland and Department of Drug Crime of the National Police of Ukraine.
Ketamine: One ketamine production site was dismantled in the European Union in 2024 (6 in
2023).
Dumping sites: In 2024, a total of 237 dumping sites for drug production waste and equipment
were reported in the European Union (236 in 2023) by Belgium (20) and the Netherlands (217).
The EUDA and Europol’s EU Drug Markets: In-depth analysis provides further detailed information
on the production and trafficking of illicit drugs.
Summary of seizures of key precursors and non-scheduled chemicals in
the European Union, by association with drug production, 2024
Table 1a. Precursors associated with MDMA production
Attribute
Substance
Quantity seized
Precursors IMDPAM (kilograms)
5
Precursors PMK (litres)
5142
Precursors PMK ethyl glycidate (kilograms) 17687
Precursors PMK glycidic acid (kilograms)
1
Precursors Safrole (litres)
1
- 16 -

Table 1b. Precursors associated with amphetamine and methamphetamine production
Attribute
Substance
Quantity seized
Precursors AIBN (kilograms)
80
Precursors APAA (kilograms)
45
Precursors APAAN (kilograms)
2
Precursors Benzaldehyde (kilograms)
8893
Precursors Benzylcyanide (kilograms)
1
Precursors BMK (litres)
3732
Precursors BMK ethyl glycidate (litres)
2470
Precursors BMK glycidic acid (kilograms)
16816
Precursors BMK methyl glycidate (kilograms)
2123
Precursors Ephedrine (kilograms)
1091
Precursors Formamide (litres)
15394
Precursors Formic acid (litres)
12373
Precursors Iodine (kilograms)
53
Precursors MAPA (kilograms)
35
Precursors Nitroethane (litres)
8
Precursors Phenyl-2-nitropropene (kilograms) 9
Precursors Pseudoephedrine (kilograms)
5314
Precursors Red phosphorus (kilograms)
136
Precursors Tartaric acid (kilograms)
7507
Table 1c. Precursors associated with heroin production
Attribute
Substance
Quantity seized
Precursors Acetic anhydride (litres) 15038
Table 1d. Precursors associated with cathinones production
Attribute
Substance
Quantity seized
Precursors 2-Bromo-3'-chloropropiophenone (kilograms) 1
Precursors 2-Bromo-4-chloropropiophenone (kilograms) 2437
Precursors 2-Bromo-4-methylpropiophenone (kilograms) 6
Precursors 3'-Chloropropiophenone (kilograms)
175
Precursors 4-Methylpropiophenone (kilograms)
1
- 17 -

Table 1e. Precursors associated with cocaine production
Attribute Substance
Quantity seized
Chemicals Calcium chloride (kilograms)
2277
Chemicals Ethyl acetate (litres)
42498
Chemicals Methyl ethyl ketone (litres)
7018
Chemicals Potassium permanganate (kilograms) 17
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-Sup-1. Number of reported drug seizures, breakdown by drug, 2024
Table EDR26-Sup-2. Drug seizures in the European Union — number of drug seizures, indexed
trends (2014 = 100)
Table EDR26-Sup-3. Drug seizures in the European Union — quantity of drugs seized, indexed
trends (2014 = 100)
Table EDR26-Sup-4. Drug seizures in the European Union — number of seizures in 2024
Table EDR26-Sup-5. Drug seizures in the European Union — quantity seized in 2024 (tonnes)
Table EDR26-Sup-6. Drug law offences — possession/use offences, indexed trends (2014 = 100)
Table EDR26-Sup-7. Drug law offences — supply offences, indexed trends (2014 = 100)
Table EDR26-Sup-8. Drug law offences — number of offences, supply and use/possession, 2024
Table EDR26-Sup-9. Quantity of precursors (EU) and key non-scheduled chemicals seized in the
European Union (2012-2024)
Table EDR26-Sup-10. Quantities of precursors and key non-scheduled chemicals seized in the
European Union in 2024 (kilograms), by their association with drug production
Table EDR26-Sup-11. Quantities of key precursor chemicals seized in the European Union in
2024 (litres), by association with drug production
Table EDR26-Sup-12. Summary of seizures of EU scheduled precursors and non-scheduled
chemicals used for selected drugs produced in the European Union, 2024
- 18 -

This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/drug-supply-production-and-precursors_en.
Some errors may have occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend
consulting the web page.
- 19 -

Cannabis – the current situation in Europe
(European Drug Report 2026)
Cannabis remains the most commonly consumed illicit drug
in Europe. On this page, you can find the latest analysis
regarding cannabis in Europe, including prevalence of use,
treatment demand, seizures, price and potency, harms and
more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Public health impact of Europe’s evolving
cannabis market remains unclear
Cannabis is the most widely consumed illicit drug in Europe, with national surveys showing that an
estimated 8.7% of European adults (25 million aged 15 to 64) have used the drug in the last year.
However, both the level of use and trends in use in national data appear heterogeneous (see
Prevalence and patterns of cannabis use, below). As some EU Member States modify their
regulatory approach to cannabis, and as cannabis markets and patterns of consumption continue
to evolve, vigilance is needed to understand potential changes in related harms.
Increasing range of cannabis products available in Europe
In Europe, illicit herbal cannabis and cannabis resin remain the most widely available and
consumed types of cannabis. However, new cannabis products and forms are available on both
the illicit drug market and the consumer goods market. Products are appearing that contain low
levels of THC, or other substances that may be derived from the cannabis plant, such as
cannabidiol (CBD), or both. Some products sold on the illicit market as cannabis may be
adulterated with potent synthetic cannabinoids. In addition, availability of high-potency extracts
and edibles raises concern and has been linked to acute drug-toxicity presentations in hospital
emergency departments and to telephone enquiries to poison centres. Also of concern is the
appearance of semi-synthetic cannabinoids on the commercial market in parts of Europe. These
are substances often produced from CBD which may be extracted from low-THC cannabis (hemp)
- 1 -

(see New psychoactive substances – the current situation in Europe).
Cannabis product diversity complicates the evaluation of harms
and treatment
People who use cannabis daily or almost daily are the most likely to experience problems from
use. Such cannabis use is linked to chronic respiratory symptoms, dependence and psychotic
symptoms, as well as poorer educational achievement and risk of involvement with the criminal
justice system. Early onset of use, high-potency products and regular, long-term use are the
factors most closely associated with the development of problems. The risk of harms is increased,
and their evaluation and treatment design are complicated by the wider availability of a more
potent and broader range of products.
Cannabis now accounts for about one third of Europe’s drug treatment admissions, representing
the largest group of people entering drug treatment. On average, there is an 11-year gap between
the first episodes of use and treatment, indicating a long period of risk exposure. A better
understanding is needed of the problems now experienced by people who use cannabis and the
effectiveness of referral pathways and treatments as cannabis problems evolve. However, this
analysis is also complicated by the wide variety of interventions provided, either within general
substance use treatment, which may include psychosocial interventions or directive referrals from
the criminal justice system, or as specialised interventions targeting people using cannabis, which
may include brief interventions. Targeted online interventions are available in several EU Member
States. Tobacco use cessation often needs to be addressed during cannabis use treatment.
More fluid tactics are being used by cannabis trafficking
networks
Valued at over EUR 12 billion, Europe’s large cannabis market generates sizeable profits for
organised crime groups involved in the cultivation, trafficking and distribution. Some EU Member
States report high levels of cannabis market-related violence, arising from its diversity and
profitability (see EU Drug Market: Cannabis – Criminal networks). Although seizures of cannabis
products overall continued to be at high levels in the European Union in 2024, cannabis resin
decreased by 42% compared with 2023 to a historical low of 321 tonnes. This reflects a 45%
decrease in resin seizures reported by Spain, where the largest quantities are generally seized,
likely driven by targeted law enforcement operations and changes in trafficking patterns.
The quantity of herbal cannabis seized in the European Union remained stable overall. However,
notable changes compared with 2023 included a decrease in Spain (−18%) and significant increases
in Belgium (1 075%) and the Netherlands (278%), where large consignments originating from
North America and other non-European regions were seized. Trafficking networks have diversified
their methods and routes in recent years, as evidenced by seizures by Spanish law enforcement of
drones and speedboats used to traffic cannabis, and by cannabis being trafficked to Europe from
- 2 -

Canada, the United States, and to a lesser extent, Thailand (Figure 2.1; also Understanding
Europe’s drug situation in 2026). In November 2025, the EUDA issued its first-ever alert via the
European Drug Alert System (EDAS), highlighting the risk of harms from the emergence of North
American cannabis on European drug markets, due to higher potency products and contamination
with potentially hazardous pesticides.
Figure 2.1. Drones (left) and a speedboat (right) used in cannabis trafficking seized in Spain
in 2025
Note: The drones were used to traffic 210 kilograms of cannabis resin and the speedboat contained 5.7 tonnes of cannabis resin.
Seizures by the Guardia Civil.
Cannabis is produced in Europe near consumer markets
In addition to trafficking, illicit cultivation within the European Union is a source of cannabis in
Europe. In 2024, Spain accounted for 75% of the total number of cannabis plants seized in the
European Union. Large-scale cannabis production also takes place in other EU Member States, for
both domestic and international markets. Thousands of cannabis cultivation sites, ranging from
small- and medium-scale to industrial, are dismantled annually by law enforcement authorities (
Figure 2.2).
- 3 -

Figure 2.2. Small- and large-scale illicit cannabis cultivation sites dismantled in Ireland (left)
and Spain (right)
Note: Small-scale site dismantled by the Garda Síochána in 2024; large-scale site dismantled by the Guardia Civil in 2024.
The use of CBD in the production of semi-synthetic cannabinoids, such as hexahydrocannabinol
(HHC), is a cause of concern. In 2026, the EUDA has been asked to assess CBD as a precursor to
support the evaluation of its role in the production of THC or other psychoactive cannabinoids. In
2024, at least three illicit sites involved in the production of THC or semi-synthetic cannabinoids
were dismantled: two in the Netherlands and one in Poland.
Cannabis policy developments highlight role of evaluation
A number of EU Member States are considering or changing their policy approach to regulating
recreational use of cannabis by adults. While differing in terms of scope and stage of
implementation, the regulation models being developed generally involve prevention measures,
non-profit sales and monitoring and evaluation. In December 2021, Malta legislated for limited
home growing, possession of small amounts and cannabis use in private. In July 2023,
Luxembourg legislated to permit limited home growing and use in private, and in February 2024,
Germany legislated to allow limited home growing, possession and use of small amounts, and
Malta and Germany also allow non-profit sales to members of regulated growing associations. The
Netherlands is conducting an experiment with a closed cannabis supply chain in 10 municipalities,
starting in 2025. During the trial, cannabis produced in regulated premises will be sold through
coffeeshops. In January 2026, Czechia legislated to permit individuals to cultivate up to three
cannabis plants for consumption in private. Home-growing activity in Germany, Luxembourg and
Malta is not systematically monitored, making the scale of uptake unclear. By the end of 2025,
Germany and Luxembourg had published interim evaluation reports. Further monitoring and
evaluation will provide policy-relevant insights into outcomes.
See also Cannabis laws in Europe: questions and answers for policymaking and Drug policy
evaluation in Europe 
- 4 -

Key data and trends
Prevalence and patterns of cannabis use
Last year cannabis use among the EU population aged 15 to 34 is estimated at 15.3%
(15.4 million), with males being typically twice as likely to report use as females (Figure 2.3).
Among 15- to 24-year-olds, an estimated 18.0% (8.6 million) used cannabis in the last year, and
9.6% (4.6 million) used the drug in the last month. It is estimated that around 1.6% (4.5 million)
of adults (aged 15 to 64) and 2.3% (2.3 million) of young adults (aged 15 to 34) are daily or
almost daily cannabis users (that is, using the drug on 20 days or more in the last month).
- 5 -

Figure 2.3. Prevalence of cannabis use in Europe
This data explorer enables you to view our data on the prevalence of cannabis use by recall period
and age range. You can access data by country by clicking on the map or selecting a country from
the dropdown menu.
Note: Prevalence data presented here are based on general population surveys submitted to the EUDA by Reitox national focal points.
For the latest data and detailed methodological information please see the Statistical Bulletin 2026: Prevalence of drug use.
Graphics showing the most recent country-level data are based on studies carried out between 2015 and 2024.
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, Greece, France, Italy and Hungary; 16-64
and 16-34 for Denmark, Estonia, Sweden and Norway; 18-65 and 18-34 for Malta.
Recall period
Last month
Last year
Lifetime
Age
Young adults (15-34)
All adults (15-64)
Country
Trends in cannabis use at the national level appear mixed. Of the countries that have produced
surveys since 2023, 3 reported higher estimates, 10 were stable and 2 reported a decrease
compared with the previous comparable survey.
- 6 -

The 2024 ESPAD school survey of 15- to 16-year-old school students showed cannabis was the
most widely used illicit drug in all participating EU Member States. On average, 13% of students
had used cannabis at least once in their lifetime.
In 2025, of the 63 cities from 17 EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye with data available
from 2024, 21 (33%) reported an annual increase in the cannabis metabolite THC-COOH in
wastewater samples, while 28 (44%) reported a decrease (Figure 2.4).
Figure 2.4. Cannabis residues in wastewater in selected European cities: changes between
2024 and 2025
Change with respect to previous year: Increase Stable Decrease 
 No previous data
Mean daily amounts of THC-COOH in milligrams per 1 000 population. In most cities, sampling was carried out over a week between
March and May 2025.
Taking into account statistical errors, values that differ by less than 10% from the previous value are considered stable in this figure.
Source: Sewage Analysis Core Group Europe (SCORE)
For the complete data set and analysis, see Wastewater analysis and drugs – a European multi-city study
- 7 -

Treatment entry for cannabis use
People entering specialist drug treatment for problems related to cannabis use accounted for
33% of all treatment demands reported in the European Union, Norway and Türkiye in 2024. Of
the estimated 104 000 clients, about 62 000 were first-time entrants. Cannabis was the main
problem drug most frequently cited by new treatment clients, accounting for 41% of all firsttime treatment entrants (Figure 2.5).
- 8 -

Figure 2.5. People entering treatment for cannabis in Europe
- 9 -

Apart from the trends, data are for all treatment entrants with cannabis as the primary drug – 2024 or the most recent year available.
Trends in first-time entrants are based on 26 countries. Only countries with data for at least 6 of the 7 years are included in the trends
analysis. Missing values are interpolated from adjacent years. Because of disruptions to services due to COVID-19, data for 2020, 2021
and 2022 should be interpreted with caution. Missing data were imputed with values from the previous year for Spain and France (2024)
and Germany (2019). In Germany, trends are affected by the near disappearance of referrals from the criminal justice system following
legislation change in February 2024.
Hospital presentations related to cannabis
Available national data indicate cannabis is involved in a large proportion of the thousands of
drug-related emergency presentations to hospitals in some EU Member States. In 2023,
cannabis was involved in over 46% of the cases (3 700 out of 8 000) reported in Spain and in 28%
(over 6 300 out of 24 300) of the cases reported in France.
After cocaine, cannabis was the second most frequently reported substance by the Euro-DEN
Plus network of sentinel hospitals in 2024. The median proportion of presentations involving
cannabis was 20% across the reporting hospitals. Cannabis was typically reported in the
presence of other substances. The median age of those presenting with cannabis was 28 years;
74% were males.
Cannabis market data
In 2024, EU Member States reported 252 000 seizures of cannabis resin, amounting to
321 tonnes (551 tonnes in 2023), and 219 000 seizures of herbal cannabis, amounting to
199 tonnes (201 tonnes in 2023) (Figure 2.6). In 2024, Türkiye reported 17 400 seizures of
cannabis resin, amounting to almost 14 tonnes, and 80 000 seizures of herbal cannabis,
amounting to 47.7 tonnes.
- 10 -

Figure 2.6a. Cannabis resin market in Europe
EU+2 refers to EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye.
Price and potency: mean national values – minimum, maximum and interquartile range. Countries vary by indicator.
Geographical coverage (selected graphs)
EU
EU+2
- 11 -

Figure 2.6b. Herbal cannabis market in Europe
EU+2 refers to EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye.
Price and potency: mean national values – minimum, maximum and interquartile range. Countries vary by indicator.
Geographical coverage (selected graphs)
EU
EU+2
After a 43% decrease in 2022, followed by a small increase, the overall quantity of cannabis resin
seized in the European Union decreased markedly again in 2024 (−42%). Despite a 45% decrease
- 12 -

compared with 2023, Spanish cannabis resin seizures remained the largest in Europe
(206 tonnes).
Approximately 477 000 offences relating to cannabis use or personal possession were reported
in the European Union in 2024 (615 000 in 2023), alongside 74 000 supply offences (100 000 in
2023).
In 2024, the average THC content of cannabis resin seized in the European Union was 24.6%,
twice that of herbal cannabis, at 12%. Indexed trends show that the average THC content of
resin increased by 66% between 2014 and 2024, whereas that of herbal cannabis increased by
19% over the same period.
See also EU Drug Market: Cannabis – In-depth analysis and Cannabis: health and social responses.
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
Prevalence of drug use data tables including general population surveys and wastewater
analysis (all substances)
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-GPS-1. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, based on most recent general population
surveys (2024 or most recent year)
Table EDR26-GPS-2. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, trends
Table EDR26-WW-1. Mean weekly measurements by targeted substance from wastewater
analysis in selected European cities in 2025
Other data tables including tables specific to cannabis
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-TDI-1. Treatment demand indicator (TDI) source data, client characteristics, 2024
or most recent year. Percentages except where otherwise stated
Table EDR26-Cannabis-3. Trends in first-time entrants, cannabis, selected countries
- 13 -

Table EDR26-Cannabis-4. Cannabis markets seizures source data, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-Cannabis-5. Trends in the number of cannabis seizures and quantity of illicit drugs
seized (x 1000)
Table EDR26-Cannabis-6. Trends in the quantities of cannabis seizures and quantity of illicit
drugs seized (tonnes)
Table EDR26-Cannabis-7. Price, potency data for cannabis, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-Cannabis-8. Price and purity/potency indexed trends
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/cannabis_en. Some errors may have occurred
during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 14 -

Cocaine – the current situation in Europe
(European Drug Report 2026)
Cocaine is, after cannabis, the second most commonly used
illicit drug in Europe. Here you can find the latest analysis
regarding cocaine in Europe, including prevalence of use,
treatment demand, seizures, price and purity, harms and
more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Resilient cocaine supply driving public health
challenges
Cocaine is, after cannabis, the second most commonly used illicit drug in Europe, although
prevalence levels and patterns of use differ considerably between countries (see Prevalence and
patterns of cocaine use). Most commonly available as powder cocaine (a salt form), the drug may
also be available as crack cocaine (a smokeable, freebase form). As cocaine’s availability continues
to increase, concerns have grown that cocaine’s health and social costs are rising significantly.
Cocaine is produced from the coca plant, grown in South America. It enters Europe through
various routes and methods, but bulk trafficking through seaports in commercial shipping
containers sustains cocaine’s high availability. Where container ports are exploited by cocaine
traffickers, high levels of drug-related crime, including corruption of staff, intimidation and
violence, have been documented. Competition within the cocaine market is an important driver of
crime, including gang-related violence and homicides in some countries. Cocaine use, and crack
cocaine use in particular, appears to be becoming more common, especially among some
marginalised communities. Overall, increased cocaine availability in Europe is linked to public
health harms and drug-related crime and violence.
Diverse trafficking tactics fuel cocaine availability
In 2024, the quantity of cocaine seized by EU Member States decreased to 330 tonnes from
419 tonnes in 2023. However, against a backdrop of increased cocaine production in South
- 1 -

America, the number of seizures increased, suggesting shifting trafficking routes and methods
rather than a decrease in the quantities shipped to Europe (see also Europe’s drug situation in
2026). Spain and France reported the largest quantities seized in 2024, with Spain confiscating
124 tonnes and France reporting the largest amount of cocaine it had ever seized, 53.5 tonnes.
Meanwhile, quantities seized decreased significantly in Belgium (by 64%), Germany (by 45%) and
the Netherlands (by 36%), in part reflecting intensified law enforcement and customs operations at
large ports.
Traffickers use other methods to evade detection, with more reports of smaller ports being
exploited, at-sea transfers via a variety of vessels, manned and unmanned semi-submersibles,
drones and complex physical and chemical concealment. This is evident from, for example, recent
large at-sea seizures from merchant ships and speedboats and sophisticated concealments in
foodstuffs in air freight (Figure 3.1). Customs and law enforcement are responding to increasingly
unpredictable and fragmented trafficking routes, methods and concealments, all contributing to a
more demanding operating environment.
Figure 3.1. Seizures of cocaine trafficked by sea and air
Note: Seizures of 10 tonnes of cocaine concealed on a merchant ship by the Spanish National Police, 2026 (left); 4 tonnes of cocaine
from a speedboat by the Spanish Tax Agency, Civil Guard and National Police, 2024 (middle); and 508 kilograms of cocaine concealed in
air freight seized by the Luxembourg Customs and Excise Agency, 2025 (right).
European cocaine production
The illicit processing of cocaine products takes place in Europe, with multiple cocaine laboratories
dismantled each year, some of which are relatively large-scale (Figure 3.2). While cocaine
production in Europe is mostly concentrated in the Netherlands, five other EU Member States
reported dismantling processing sites in 2024. Among these sites were facilities for secondary
extraction of cocaine chemically concealed in other materials (e.g. plastics) to evade detection in
commercial shipments. In addition, cocaine base and paste are trafficked in large quantities to
Europe for processing into cocaine hydrochloride.
- 2 -

Figure 3.2. Large cocaine production site dismantled in Spain, 2024
Note: Seizure by the Civil Guard.
Cocaine-related health problems continue to grow
The high availability of cocaine is having a growing negative impact on public health in Europe,
and use of the drug remains an important issue for prevention and harm reduction messaging
and interventions. Cocaine is the second most frequently reported illicit drug by first-time entrants
to specialist drug treatment and remains the most frequently reported substance in acute drugtoxicity presentations to sentinel hospital emergency departments. In 2024, cocaine was involved
in 27% of drug-induced deaths. As cocaine use can aggravate cardiovascular problems, its role in
mortality in Europe is underestimated. Data on cocaine residues in municipal wastewater and
other sources suggest that cocaine’s increasing availability has been accompanied by a wider
geographical and social distribution. European drug checking services reported that cocaine was
the second most common substance they screened in 2025. Of particular concern is the use of
cocaine, including crack cocaine, among more marginalised groups in some countries. Injecting of
both powder cocaine and crack cocaine, either alone or in combination with heroin, is reported by
drug consumption rooms across Europe. Cocaine injecting has been involved in localised HIV
outbreaks in four European cities over the last decade (see Injecting drug use in Europe – the
current situation).
Reducing harms and treating cocaine use remain challenging
Cocaine use is associated with adverse health consequences, with most chronic harms related to
intensive, high-dose or long-term consumption which, in addition to dependence, can increase the
risk of cardiovascular problems. Cocaine use can trigger stimulant-induced psychosis, for which
integrated drug treatment and mental health services are often lacking. Regular cocaine use and
high-risk use patterns are more strongly associated with harmful outcomes, such as suicide,
accidental injury, homicide and HIV/AIDS. The combined use of cocaine and alcohol is common,
and in the presence of the two substances, the body creates cocaethylene, potentially increasing
the health risks.
- 3 -

Treating people with cocaine-related problems remains challenging, whether they are socially
integrated and involved in episodic use of powder cocaine, or more marginalised groups injecting
cocaine or smoking crack cocaine. The current evidence supports the use of psychosocial
interventions, including cognitive behavioural therapy and contingency management. However,
the evidence remains insufficient to support any pharmacological treatment. Treatment can be
particularly challenging among more marginalised groups, potentially requiring integrated
services, when patients also experience problems with their mental and physical health and with
other drugs, including opioids or alcohol, possibly compounded by socio-economic deprivation
and unstable accommodation. Existing harm reduction responses can reduce route-specific harms
from injecting cocaine and smoking crack. However, more comprehensive interventions are
needed, as is greater investment to ensure services are aligned with growing needs in some
countries.
Key data and trends
Prevalence and patterns of cocaine use
In the European Union, surveys indicate that 2.5 million 15- to 34-year-olds (2.5% of this age
group) used cocaine in the last year (Figure 3.3). Of the 14 European countries that have
conducted surveys since 2023, seven reported higher estimates than their previous comparable
survey and four reported a stable trend.
- 4 -

Figure 3.3. Prevalence of cocaine use in Europe
This data explorer enables you to view our data on the prevalence of cocaine use by recall period
and age range. You can access data by country by clicking on the map or selecting a country from
the dropdown menu.
Note: Prevalence data presented here are based on general population surveys submitted to the EUDA by national focal points. For the
latest data and detailed methodological information, please see the Statistical Bulletin 2026: Prevalence of drug use.
Graphics showing the most recent data for a country are based on studies carried out between 2015 and 2024.
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, Greece, France, Italy and Hungary; 16-64
and 16-34 for Denmark, Estonia and Norway; 18-65 and 18-34 for Malta; 17-34 for Sweden.
Recall period
Last month
Last year
Lifetime
Age
Young adults (15-34)
All adults (15-64)
Country
In the 2024 ESPAD school survey, on average, 2% of 15- to 16-year-old school students reported
having used cocaine at least once in their lifetime.
- 5 -

Cocaine residues in municipal wastewater increased in 48 (57%) out of 85 cities from 23 EU
Member States, Norway and Türkiye with data for both 2025 and 2024, while 21 (25%) cities
reported no change and 16 (19%) cities reported a decrease (Figure 3.4).
Figure 3.4. Cocaine residues in wastewater in selected European cities: changes between
2024 and 2025
Change with respect to previous year: Increase Stable Decrease 
 No previous data
Mean daily amounts of benzoylecgonine in milligrams per 1 000 population. Sampling was carried out over a week between March and
May 2025.
Taking into account statistical errors, values that differ by less than 10% from the previous value are considered stable in this figure.
Source: Sewage Analysis Core Group Europe (SCORE)
For the complete data set and analysis, see Wastewater analysis and drugs – a European multi-city study
In the 2024 European Web Survey on Drugs, a non-representative survey of people who use
drugs, 29% of EU or Norwegian respondents reported having used powder cocaine, crack
cocaine or both in the last 12 months. Polysubstance use was reported by 96% of those using
- 6 -

powder cocaine.
Analysis of 3 256 used syringes by the ESCAPE network of 21 cities in 14 EU Member States and
Norway in 2024 found that cocaine was detected in more than 50% of syringes in 10 cities:
Thessaloniki (95%), Barcelona (94%), Limerick (91%), Split (87%), Dublin (70%), Madrid
(69%), Cork (69%), Volos (68%), Cologne (62%) and Athens (61%).
Treatment entry for cocaine use
Cocaine was the second most common problem drug among people entering specialist drug
treatment for the first time in 2024, cited by an estimated 37 000 clients or 25% of all first-time
entrants (Figure 3.5).
The number of clients entering treatment for cocaine-related problems for the first time
increased by 39% between 2018 and 2024.
A time lag of 14 years exists between first use of powder cocaine (12 years for crack), on
average at the age of 22, and first treatment for cocaine-related problems, on average at the
age of 36 (Figure 3.5).
Injecting was reported as the main route of administration by less than 2% of first-time cocaine
clients in 2024.
Treatment entry for crack cocaine use
Just 5 EU Member States accounted for 85% of the estimated 11 400 crack-related treatment
entrants in 2024 (9 900 in 2023), of which 4 300 were first-time entrants (Figure 3.5).
The number of first-time treatment entrants with crack cocaine as primary drug increased by
53%, from 2 800 clients in 2018 to 4 300 clients in 2024.
Almost one quarter of those who enter treatment for crack cocaine are women (23% in 2024).
Drug consumption rooms in 15 cities across 12 EU Member States and Norway provide data to
the EUDA. In the first half of 2025, powder cocaine use was reported in 10 cities across 8
countries, while crack cocaine use was reported in 12 cities across 9 countries. Crack cocaine
was mostly smoked, while powder cocaine was mostly injected. Injection accounted for a
minority (4-20%) of crack cocaine consumption episodes in drug consumption rooms that allow
smoking in 4 cities in 3 EU Member States, but for all episodes in 2 cities in 2 countries where
smoking was not permitted.
- 7 -

Figure 3.5. Clients entering treatment for cocaine use
Substance
Cocaine
Crack cocaine
Powder cocaine
- 8 -

Note: Apart from the trends, data are for all treatment entrants with cocaine as the primary drug – 2024 or the most recent year
available. Trends in first-time entrants are based on 26 countries. Only countries with data for at least 6 of the 7 years are included in
the trends analysis. Missing values are interpolated from adjacent years. Because of disruptions to services due to COVID-19, data for
2020, 2021 and 2022 should be interpreted with caution. Missing data were imputed with values from the previous year for Spain and
France (2024) and Germany (2019).
Harms related to cocaine use
Cocaine was the most common substance reported by Euro-DEN Plus sentinel hospitals in 2024,
mentioned in 26% (1 374) of acute drug-toxicity presentations.
The median age of those presenting was 33 years; 79% were males.
Six Euro-DEN Plus sentinel hospitals reported an increase in presentations involving cocaine in
2024 compared with 2023, while 8 reported a decrease (Figure 3.6).
- 9 -

Figure 3.6. Trends in the numbers of cocaine-related presentations in Euro-DEN Plus sentinel
hospitals, 2023 to 2024
Data source: Euro-DEN Plus network.
Note: Values that differ by less than 10% from the previous value are considered stable. Only centres reporting at least 20 presentations
for each year are represented.
In Bratislava, Bucharest, Gdansk and Riga, there were 10 or fewer cocaine-related presentations in 2024, limiting comparability between
years. For the latest data and detailed methodological information please see: Euro-DEN data explorer.
Among the 20 European countries providing data for both years, cocaine was involved in
approximately one quarter (1 133 or 27%) of the drug-induced deaths in 2024 (1 053 or 26% in
2023).
Most cocaine-related deaths involved polysubstance use (Figure 3.7).
- 10 -

Figure 3.7. Polysubstance toxicity in drug-induced death cases with cocaine involved, 2024
(or most recent year available)
Note: Data on cases with cocaine involved from special mortality registers. Countries are sorted in descending order by the proportion
of cases involving cocaine alone. In the country label, N represents the total number of drug-induced deaths, with the total share
involving cocaine given as a percentage. Only countries with at least 20 cocaine-related cases are included. The year of data is indicated
for countries where 2024 data were unavailable. For France, only implicated substances are reported, while for other countries, all
mentions are reported.
Cocaine market data
In 2024, EU Member States reported 97 000 cocaine seizures, amounting to 330 tonnes
(419 tonnes in 2023). Spain (124 tonnes), France (53.5 tonnes) and Belgium (44.6 tonnes)
together accounted for 67% of the total quantity seized (Figure 3.8). In addition, significant
quantities were reported by the Netherlands (37.6 tonnes), Germany (23.8 tonnes), Portugal
(23 tonnes), Italy (11 tonnes), Ireland (3.3 tonnes) and Türkiye (2.5 tonnes).
The average purity of cocaine at retail level ranged from 48% to 92% across Europe in 2024, with
half of the countries reporting an average purity between 64% and 75%. While the price of
cocaine at retail level has decreased over the past decade, cocaine purity has been on an
upward trend, and in 2024 reached a level 44% higher than the index year of 2014 (Figure 3.8).
- 11 -

Figure 3.8. Cocaine market in Europe
EU + 2 refers to EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye.
Geographical coverage (selected graphs)
EU
EU+2
- 12 -

Price and purity: mean national values – minimum, maximum and interquartile range. Countries vary by indicator.
In 2024, 6 EU Member States dismantled at least 42 sites related to cocaine production (34 in
2023). An additional facility was dismantled by Türkiye. A considerably lower quantity of
potassium permanganate, an essential chemical in cocaine production, was seized in 2024
(17 kilograms) than in 2023 (2.1 tonnes). In contrast, seizures of the cocaine adulterant procaine
surged in 2024 to 7.3 tonnes (130 kilograms in 2023).
In 2024, cocaine was cited in 102 000 use or possession offences, representing about 14% of all
such offences for which the drug is known.
In 2025, a purity of 80% or higher was found in about 65% (50% in 2024) of the cocaine samples
tested by 9 drug checking services across 5 EU Member States. The same services reported
caffeine (5% of samples), procaine and phenacetin (4% each) and levamisole (3%) as the most
frequently detected adulterants.
See also EU Drug Market: Cocaine and Stimulants: health and social responses.
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
Prevalence of drug use data tables including general population surveys and wastewater
analysis (all substances)
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-GPS-1. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, based on most recent general population
surveys (2024 or most recent year)
Table EDR26-GPS-2. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, trends
Table EDR26-WW-1. Mean weekly measurements by targeted substance from wastewater
analysis in selected European cities in 2025
Other data tables including tables specific to cocaine
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
- 13 -

Table EDR26-TDI-1. Treatment demand indicator (TDI) source data, client characteristics, 2024
or most recent year. Percentages except where otherwise stated
Table EDR26-Cocaine-3. Trends in first-time entrants, cocaine, selected countries
Table EDR26-Cocaine-4. Cocaine markets seizures source data
Table EDR26-Cocaine-5. Trends in the number of cocaine seizures and quantity of illicit drugs
seized (x 1000)
Table EDR26-Cocaine-6. Trends in the quantities of cocaine seizures and quantity of illicit drugs
seized (tonnes)
Table EDR26-Cocaine-7. Price, potency data for cocaine, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-Cocaine-10. Price and purity/potency indexed trends, cocaine
Table EDR26-Cocaine-9. Trends in the numbers of cocaine-related presentations in Euro-DEN
Plus sentinel hospitals 2023 to 2024
Table EDR26-Cocaine-11. Polysubstance toxicity in drug-related deaths cases with cocaine
involved
 
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/cocaine_en. Some errors may have occurred
during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 14 -

Synthetic stimulants – the current situation in
Europe (European Drug Report 2026)
Amphetamine, methamphetamine and, more recently,
synthetic cathinones are all synthetic central nervous system
stimulants available on Europe’s drug market. Here, you can
find the latest analysis regarding synthetic stimulants in
Europe, including prevalence, treatment, seizures, price and
purity, harms and more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Resilient supply of stimulants creating health
and monitoring challenges
Amphetamine, methamphetamine and synthetic cathinones are all synthetic central nervous
system stimulants available on Europe’s illicit drug market. Historically, amphetamine use has
been the most common, with methamphetamine and synthetic cathinones less widely available
and used. However, recent market signals suggest increasing use and diffusion of
methamphetamine, and in particular, synthetic cathinones in Europe. Synthetic drug production in
Europe is dynamic, influencing and responding to shifts in consumer preferences for specific
stimulants, while also driving market expansion by introducing new substances at retail level.
Consumers may view different stimulants as functionally similar and be willing to try new
products. People may also consume new replacement substances without their knowledge.
Therefore, the more widespread availability and use of synthetic stimulants raises concerns about
increased health and social problems. Emerging stimulants such as synthetic cathinones also pose
monitoring challenges, as some existing tools are better suited to identifying and tracking changes
related to established illicit synthetic stimulant drugs such as amphetamine. Multilevel monitoring
systems incorporating more sensitive tools, such as improved forensic and toxicological analysis,
the EU Early Warning System and other leading-edge indicators, are necessary for understanding
market changes earlier.
- 1 -

Harm reduction and treatment must respond to an evolving
stimulants market
Although amphetamine, methamphetamine and synthetic cathinones share a similar chemical
structure, their psychoactive effects and health risks vary significantly. For example, some
synthetic cathinones, such as 4-CMC, have effects and potential harms similar to MDMA and
amphetamine, while others, such as alpha-PVP (α-pyrrolidinovalerophenone), may elicit stronger
effects and harms. The effects of many synthetic cathinones on humans have not been extensively
researched. Polysubstance use also increases health risks. For all stimulant drugs, health risks
include overdoses, cardiovascular complications, acute and chronic mental health problems and,
depending on the mode of administration, the spread of infectious diseases. The combination of
high-risk drug taking and risky sexual behaviours, known as sexualised drug use, has been
documented in some populations. Methamphetamine smoking is reported by drug consumption
rooms around Europe, raising additional health concerns. In the last decade, seven European
cities, across six countries, have reported localised HIV outbreaks associated with stimulant
injecting, which tends to be more frequent than opioid injecting, mainly among marginalised
people who inject drugs (see Drug-related infectious diseases – the current situation in Europe).
Syringe residue analysis conducted by the ESCAPE network in 2024 confirms the presence of
various stimulants in many European injecting drug scenes. The Euro-DEN Plus network of sentinel
hospitals across Europe continued to report synthetic stimulants in acute drug toxicity
presentations to emergency departments in 2024. With the potential for rapid shifts in the
availability of substances, limited knowledge of health risks and the lack of an established
pharmacological therapy for dependence, the increased availability of synthetic stimulants poses
an evolving challenge for response models.
Risk of wider methamphetamine use from production and
trafficking
Although amphetamine is more widely used in Europe, signals indicate the spread of
methamphetamine consumption to an increasing number of countries. These drugs can be
manufactured from benzyl methyl ketone (BMK), and seizures of BMK and chemicals from which it
can be synthesised remain significant in Europe. Seizures of tartaric acid, used in the production of
‘crystal meth’ to retrieve potent d-methamphetamine from mixtures produced by BMK methods,
remained high in Europe in 2024. While the available data make it hard to comment with certainty
on the actual output of dismantled methamphetamine laboratories, law enforcement information
indicates that large-scale production continues, mostly in the Netherlands, but also in Germany
and Poland. Small ‘kitchen-scale’ sites producing methamphetamine using ephedrine methods are
dismantled in Czechia and Bulgaria. However, the detection of medium- and larger-scale
production facilities using ephedrine or BMK-based synthesis in Czechia and some other countries
signals a change in methods and the possible expansion of production into more EU Member
States. While amphetamine production remains concentrated in the Netherlands, Germany and
Poland, sites in other EU Member States are involved in preparing the drug for retail markets by
- 2 -

converting amphetamine base oil into the sulfate salt.
Amphetamine and methamphetamine are trafficked in various ways (Figure 4.1), and increased
quantities of both drugs were seized in the European Union in 2024. Reported large seizures of
methamphetamine, often of Mexican origin, indicate transhipment through Europe to other
destinations. Overall, evidence of increased production and trafficking of amphetamines in
Europe, for domestic demand or export, suggests the potential for increased availability and use.
Furthermore, uncertainty remains about the effects of events in Afghanistan on the EU heroin
market and any potential shift to stimulants as replacement substances.
Figure 4.1. Seizures of amphetamine in Sweden (left two) and methamphetamine in
Germany (right two), 2025
Note: Seizures by Swedish Customs Authority Office and Customs Investigation Office Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Imports and dynamic production are embedding synthetic
cathinones in Europe’s drug market
In some parts of Europe, synthetic cathinones have established themselves on the illicit drug
market as affordable alternatives to other synthetic stimulants and are now increasingly available.
In 2025, the EU Early Warning System received notifications of four new synthetic cathinones not
previously detected in the European Union, bringing the number identified to date to 181. At the
same time, 69 previously reported synthetic cathinones were detected on the EU drug market,
highlighting the challenges faced by monitoring systems. Imports and seizures of these
substances in 2024 amounted to almost three times the combined quantity of amphetamine and
methamphetamine seized. A small number of large imports from India, primarily through the
Netherlands, accounted for most of the quantity of cathinones reported. Significant levels of
synthetic cathinone production also occur in Europe, where large-scale laboratories have been
dismantled and large quantities of precursor chemicals seized. Although production is mostly
concentrated in Poland (Figure 4.2), facilities are dismantled in several other countries, likely
reflecting diffusion and tactical evasion of legislative changes. European synthetic cathinone
production is characterised by adaptable facilities, both in terms of location and the substances
- 3 -

manufactured, and large-scale output. The same laboratory can manufacture different synthetic
cathinones by adjusting precursor chemicals or synthesis steps, enabling drug producers to
respond rapidly to market demand, precursor availability or legal controls. While some cathinone
production is destined for EU markets, evidence suggests that some large-scale operations are
aimed at export and domestic supply, as illustrated by the dismantling of a high-capacity
clephedrone laboratory in Latvia in 2024 (Figure 4.3). 
Figure 4.2. Synthetic cathinones seized at a laboratory in Poland, 2024
Note: Seizure by the Central Bureau of Police Investigation.
Figure 4.3. Large synthetic cathinone laboratory dismantled in Latvia, 2024
Note: Seizure by the State Police of Latvia.
Data from drug checking services support the view that synthetic cathinones are sought
intentionally, at least by some people, although the exact cathinone found in the sample often
differs from the one believed to have been purchased. This reflects the dynamic nature of
cathinone production and creates shifting health risks.
Relatively few people enter specialised treatment for problems related to the use of synthetic
cathinones in EU Member States. However, the number has increased five-fold between 2018 and
2024, to approximately 2 700. Among these, 17% report injecting as the main route of
- 4 -

administration, and 17% report daily use before entering treatment.
Synthetic stimulants are a growing challenge for responses
As consuming illicit stimulants can lead to a range of health problems, these substances continue
to represent a challenge for monitoring, policymakers and service providers in Europe. Given the
higher frequency of injecting typically associated with stimulant use and the potentially severe
health complications from injecting and smoking methamphetamine, any increase in consumption
of this substance, especially among vulnerable groups, could challenge harm reduction and
emergency health services. Increased cathinone consumption highlights the importance of
forensic and toxicological analysis for understanding consumption trends and the scale and nature
of any associated adverse health outcomes.
Key data and trends
Prevalence and patterns of synthetic stimulant use
Surveys conducted in 26 EU Member States between 2018 and 2024 suggest that 1.4 million
young adults (aged 15 to 34) used amphetamines during the last year (1.4% of this age group).
Of the 11 European countries that have conducted surveys since 2023, 2 reported lower
estimates than their previous comparable survey, 5 reported higher estimates, and 4 reported a
stable trend (Figure 4.4 for the most recent survey data). National estimates of last year use of
cathinones among young adults (aged 15 to 34) range from 0.1% in Romania to 4.4% in the
Netherlands.
- 5 -

Figure 4.4. Prevalence of amphetamines use in Europe
Notes: ‘Amphetamines’ covers both amphetamine and methamphetamine. Prevalence data presented here are based on general
population surveys submitted to the EUDA by national focal points. For the latest data and detailed methodological information please
see the Statistical Bulletin 2026: Prevalence of drug use.
Graphics showing the most recent data for a country are based on studies carried out between 2018 and 2024.
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, Greece, France, Italy and Hungary; 16-64
and 16-34 for Denmark, Estonia and Norway; 18-34 for Malta; 17-34 for Sweden.
Recall period
Last month
Last year
Lifetime
Age
Young adults (15-34)
All adults (15-64)
Country
In the 2024 ESPAD school survey, on average, 1.8% of the 15- to 16-year-old students reported
having used amphetamine at least once in their lifetime, and 1.4% reported having used
methamphetamine.
- 6 -

Among the few countries that report estimates of high-risk use of methamphetamine in 2024,
prevalence estimates vary, ranging from 0.42 per 1 000 population (corresponding to 250 highrisk users) in Cyprus to 5.51 per 1 000 (38 200 high-risk users) in Czechia, with 4.4 per 1 000
(15 725 high-risk users) in Slovakia.
In the 2024 European Web Survey on Drugs, a non-representative survey of people who use
drugs, 17% of respondents living in the European Union or Norway reported having used
amphetamine, while 9% had used synthetic cathinones and 5% had used methamphetamine.
Polysubstance use was common among those using amphetamine (91%) and
methamphetamine (87%).
Of the 82 cities in 23 EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye with data on amphetamine
residues in municipal wastewater for 2024 and 2025, 36 (44%) reported an increase, 19 (23%) a
stable situation and 27 (33%) a decrease (Figure 4.5).
- 7 -

Figure 4.5. Amphetamine residues in wastewater in selected European cities: changes
between 2024 and 2025
Change with respect to previous year: Increase Stable Decrease 
 No previous data
Notes: Mean daily amounts of amphetamine in milligrams per 1 000 population. Sampling was carried out over a week between March
and May 2025.
Taking into account statistical errors, values that differ by less than 10% from the previous value are considered stable in this figure.
Source: Sewage Analysis Core Group Europe (SCORE)
For the complete data set and analysis, see Wastewater analysis and drugs – a European multi-city study
Of the 80 cities in 24 EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye with data on methamphetamine
residues in municipal wastewater for 2024 and 2025, 37 (46%) reported an increase, 15 (19%) a
stable situation and 28 (35%) a decrease (Figure 4.6).
- 8 -

Figure 4.6. Methamphetamine residues in wastewater in selected European cities: changes
between 2024 and 2025
Change with respect to previous year: Increase Stable Decrease 
 No previous data
Notes: Mean daily amounts of methamphetamine in milligrams per 1 000 population. Sampling was carried out over a week between
March and May 2025.
Taking into account statistical errors, values that differ by less than 10% from the previous value are considered stable in this figure.
Source: Sewage Analysis Core Group Europe (SCORE)
For the complete data set and analysis, see Wastewater analysis and drugs – a European multi-city study
Treatment entry for use of synthetic stimulants
About 8 900 clients are estimated to have entered specialised drug treatment in Europe in 2024
reporting amphetamine as their primary drug, approximately half of them (4 300) being firsttime clients (Figure 4.7).
In 2024 or the most recent year available, amphetamine clients accounted for at least 10% of
first-time treatment entrants in Bulgaria, Estonia, Croatia, Latvia, Hungary, Poland, Finland and
- 9 -

Sweden.
- 10 -

Figure 4.7. Clients entering treatment for amphetamine use in Europe
- 11 -

Notes: Data are for all treatment entrants with amphetamine as the primary drug – 2024 or the most recent year available. Data for
first-time entrants are for 2024 or the most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. Data for Sweden and Norway relate to
clients citing stimulants other than cocaine as primary drug.
Treatment entrants citing methamphetamine as their main problem drug are concentrated in
Czechia, Germany, Slovakia and Türkiye, which together accounted for 92% of the estimated
14 500 methamphetamine clients entering treatment in 2024. Methamphetamine accounts for
more than 30% of first-time entrants in Czechia, Slovakia and Türkiye (Figure 4.8).
- 12 -

Figure 4.8. Clients entering treatment for methamphetamine use in Europe
- 13 -

Notes: Data for client characteristics are for all treatment entrants with methamphetamine as the primary drug – 2024 or the most
recent year available. Data for first-time entrants are for 2024 or the most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023.
Data from countries that report treatment entrants for synthetic cathinones show an increase
from 536 clients in 2018 to 2 671 clients in 2024, 95% of whom are accounted for by France, the
Netherlands, Spain, Poland, Hungary, Belgium and Romania (Figure 4.9).
- 14 -

Figure 4.9. Clients entering treatment for synthetic cathinones in Europe
- 15 -

Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or the most recent year available. Trends in treatment entrants are based on 26 countries.
Only countries with data for at least 6 of the 7 years are included in the trends graph. Missing data were imputed with values from the
previous year for Spain and France (2023) and Germany (2019). Data for Hungary were corrected to account for changes in reporting of
cathinones in 2024. Because of disruptions to services due to COVID-19, data for 2020, 2021 and 2022 should be interpreted with
caution.
Drug consumption rooms in 15 cities across 12 EU Member States and Norway provide data to
the EUDA. At least one consumption episode of amphetamine or methamphetamine was
reported by drug consumption rooms in 9 cities across 8 EU Member States in 2025. Drug
consumption rooms located in 3 cities across 3 Member States reported at least a two-fold
increase in the use of amphetamine and methamphetamine between 2024 and 2025.
Injecting use of synthetic stimulants
Injecting is reported as a common route of administration by those entering treatment with
amphetamine as their primary drug in several countries, including Finland (75%), Estonia (60%)
and Sweden (56%).
About 5% of amphetamine clients entering drug treatment in Europe in 2024, or the most
recent year available, reported injecting as the main route of administration.
Analysis of 3 256 used syringes by the ESCAPE network of 21 cities in 14 EU Member States and
Norway in 2024 found that half of the syringes contained residues of two or more drug
categories. The most frequent combination was an opioid and a stimulant.
In the ESCAPE data, synthetic cathinones were commonly detected in Paris (71%), Budapest
(58%), Madrid (30%), Riga (30%) and Helsinki (23%). Twenty-seven different synthetic cathinones
were detected in the 2024 campaign.
- 16 -

Amphetamine was commonly detected in Tallinn (69%), Oslo (69%), Riga (52%), Budapest (28%)
and Helsinki (21%).
Methamphetamine detection was highest in Brno (72%), Prague (68%), Riga (38%), Amsterdam
(37%), Tallinn (28%) and Paris (25%).
Harms related to use of synthetic stimulants
In acute toxicity presentations to the Euro-DEN Plus network of sentinel hospitals, amphetamine
was the third most common substance overall in 2024, reported by 25 hospitals located in 18 EU
Member States and Norway. It was present in 14% (765) of the acute drug-toxicity
presentations.
Methamphetamine was reported by 22 Euro-DEN Plus hospitals in 2024 and was present in 4%
(200) of the acute drug-toxicity presentations (2.4% in 2023).
In 2024, cathinones were reported by 19 Euro-DEN Plus hospitals located in 13 EU Member
States and Norway. Cathinones were present in 2.1% of acute drug toxicity presentations.
The 18 EU Member States with relevant post-mortem data available for 2024 reported around
1 000 drug-induced deaths where synthetic stimulants, including MDMA, were involved (897 in
2023 in the same countries).
Synthetic stimulants market data
In 2024, EU Member States reported 34 000 seizures of amphetamine, amounting to
11.4 tonnes (10.2 tonnes in 2023; Figure 4.10). Türkiye seized 4.2 tonnes (3.5 tonnes in 2023),
including 15.9 million tablets described as ‘captagon’ (14 million in 2023). Between 2014 and
2024, the average purity of amphetamine at retail level has slightly decreased (by 8%), while the
average price has decreased (by 25%).
- 17 -

Figure 4.10. Amphetamine market in Europe
Notes: EU+2 refers to EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye.
Price and purity: mean national values – minimum, maximum and interquartile range. Countries vary by indicator.
Geographical coverage (selected graphs)
EU
EU+2
- 18 -

EU Member States reported 14 100 seizures of methamphetamine amounting to 6.1 tonnes in
2024 (1.8 tonnes in 2023) (Figure 4.11). Türkiye reported 60 300 seizures of methamphetamine
in 2024, amounting to 25.9 tonnes and 7 904 litres (11.5 tonnes and 10 415 litres in 2023).
Between 2014 and 2024, the average purity of methamphetamine has increased by 21%,
although this is below the 36% increase reported in 2020.
- 19 -

Figure 4.11. Methamphetamine market in Europe
Notes: EU+2 refers to EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye.
Price and purity: mean national values – minimum, maximum and interquartile range. Countries vary by indicator.
Geographical coverage (selected graphs)
EU
EU+2
- 20 -

The total quantity of synthetic cathinones reported to the EU Early Warning System as seized or
imported by EU Member States in 2024, in all forms, amounted to 48.5 tonnes (37 tonnes in
2023, 27 tonnes in 2022). The main substances were 2-MMC, NEP, 4-CMC and MDPHP,
amounting to 44 tonnes.
In 2024, nine EU Member States reported dismantling 110 amphetamine laboratories. Also, one
site related to amphetamine production was dismantled in Norway. Ten EU Member States
reported dismantling 252 methamphetamine laboratories (251 in 2023). Türkiye reported five
production/conversion sites.
Seizures of the precursors required to synthesise methamphetamine via the ‘ephedrine method’
(ephedrine and pseudoephedrine) amounted to 6.4 tonnes (7.8 tonnes in 2023). Seizures of
BMK, a precursor for amphetamine and methamphetamine, reached 3 732 litres (5 453 litres in
2023). In addition, 21.6 tonnes of substances (66.2 tonnes in 2023) that can be used to produce
BMK were seized in 2024. In 2024, the Netherlands reported dismantling 27 precursor
production laboratories where BMK was made.
Seizures of tartaric acid, used in the production of ‘crystal meth’, reached 7.5 tonnes in 2024
(10.9 tonnes in 2023).
EU Member States reported dismantling 63 synthetic cathinone production sites, some of which
were large-scale, in 2024 (54 in 2023).
Seizures of chemicals used to manufacture synthetic cathinones amounted to 2.6 tonnes in
2024 (2.1 tonnes in 2023). Most of these substances are unscheduled.
In 2025, data from 12 drug checking services in 8 EU Member States, the majority of samples
found to contain synthetic cathinones were submitted as such (76%, 1 534); 16% (323) were
submitted as another drug (mostly MDMA), while for 8% (154) the expected substance was not
declared. Samples sold as 3-MMC often contained 2-MMC instead.
See also EU Drug Markets: In-depth analysis and Stimulants: health and social responses.
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
Prevalence of drug use data tables including general population surveys and wastewater
analysis (all substances)
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
- 21 -

Table EDR26-GPS-1. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, based on most recent general population
surveys (2024 or most recent year)
Table EDR26-GPS-2. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, trends
Table EDR26-WW-1. Mean weekly measurements by targeted substance from wastewater
analysis in selected European cities in 2025
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-GPS-1. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, based on most recent general population
surveys (2024 or most recent year)
Table EDR26-GPS-2. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, trends
Table EDR26-WW-1. Mean weekly measurements by targeted substance from wastewater
analysis in selected European cities in 2025
Other data tables including tables specific to synthetic stimulants
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-TDI-1. Treatment demand indicator (TDI) source data, client characteristics, 2024
or most recent year. Percentages except where otherwise stated
Table EDR26-Stimulants-1. Amphetamine and methamphetamine entrants as a share of all firsttime treatment entrants
Table EDR26-Stimulants-2. Trends in all entrants for synthetic cathinone users
Table EDR26- Stimulants-3. Synthetic stimulants seizures source data, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-Stimulants-4. Synthetic stimulants market price and purity data, 2024 or most
recent year
Table EDR26-Stimulants-7. Trends in the quantities of synthetic stimulants seized, tonnes 20142024
Table EDR26-Stimulants-6. Trends in the number of synthetic stimulants seizures 2014-2024
Table EDR26-Stimulants-5. Synthetic stimulants retail market price and purity data indexed
trends (2014=100)
- 22 -

This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/synthetic-stimulants_en. Some errors may have
occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 23 -

MDMA – the current situation in Europe
(European Drug Report 2026)
MDMA is a synthetic drug chemically related to the
amphetamines, but with somewhat different effects. In
Europe, MDMA use has generally been associated with
episodic patterns of consumption in nightlife and
entertainment settings. On this page, you can find the latest
analysis of the drug situation for MDMA in Europe, including
prevalence of use, seizures, price and purity and more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Increased MDMA production and seizures,
continued health risks from high-strength
products
MDMA is a synthetic drug chemically related to the amphetamines, but with somewhat different
effects. In Europe, MDMA is associated with episodic patterns of consumption in nightlife and
entertainment settings. Survey data indicate that MDMA is the second most commonly used illicit
stimulant in Europe, after cocaine. Current data suggest that annual consumption is relatively
stable overall, although signals from wastewater monitoring suggest MDMA consumption may be
declining.
Rising European MDMA production reflects innovative tactics
and global demand
MDMA production takes place within Europe, both for domestic consumption and for export to
non-EU markets. Europe remains an important global supply region for MDMA. Production is
mainly concentrated in the Netherlands and Belgium, with Spain becoming increasingly prominent
(Figure 5.1). Evidence from a number of sources indicates rising MDMA production in Europe,
including increased seizures of tablets and powders, alongside historically low retail and wholesale
- 1 -

prices and elevated MDMA content. In addition, illicit MDMA production sites of varying sizes and
output capacities are dismantled annually, and the number more than doubled between 2023 and
2024. Reflecting new efforts to circumvent international controls on the MDMA precursor chemical
PMK (piperonyl methyl ketone), over a third of the illicit laboratories were combination facilities,
mostly based in the Netherlands, manufacturing both the PMK precursor and MDMA. This may
partly explain the increase in European MDMA production, despite reductions in seizures of PMK
and its glycidic derivatives. However, seizures of these substances remained at significant levels in
2024. Alongside MDMA production for domestic consumption in Europe, the drug is also trafficked
to regions such as Oceania, Asia and Latin America. MDMA production in Europe has a significant
environmental impact, potentially generating between 1 000 and 3 000 tonnes of chemical waste
each year. Production sites are prone to accidents, explosions and fires, posing significant risks to
surrounding communities.
Figure 5.1. MDMA production facility dismantled by Belgian Police in 2024
MDMA product strength continues to pose health risks
MDMA tablets are typically available in many designs, often colourful replications of brand logos.
While MDMA may sometimes appear in other forms, such as edibles, gelatines and lollipops,
tablets and powders remain predominant. The MDMA content of retail-level ecstasy tablets is high
by historical standards, having increased from around 84 milligrams per tablet in 2011 to
170 milligrams in 2019 and remained at elevated levels since. Ecstasy tablets containing
300 milligrams or more of MDMA remain available in Europe. The continued availability of highstrength products potentially increases the health risks related to MDMA use, as does
polysubstance use, which remains common. Use of MDMA is rarely cited as a reason for entering
drug treatment in Europe, but it is associated with acute poisonings and deaths. Some countries,
- 2 -

including Germany, reported relatively small but increasing numbers of drug-induced deaths
involving MDMA in 2024. Türkiye remains the only country reporting data to the EUDA with a high
proportion of drug-induced deaths in which MDMA is mentioned in the toxicological analysis.
MDMA-related consumer awareness challenges remain
The use of MDMA remains an important issue for prevention and harm reduction messaging and
interventions. As the MDMA content and purity of retail-level batches of pills and powder can vary,
consumers are exposed to potentially shifting and unpredictable levels of risk. Measures typically
undertaken in this area include risk communications about high-strength products and safer use
guidelines, as well as providing drop-in services and, in some countries, drug checking services,
where consumers can have the composition of their substances analysed. In Ireland in 2025, the
Health Service Executive Safer Nightlife Programme issued two risk alerts informing about
unusually strong MDMA tablets detected at two music festivals (Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.2. Example of risk alert communications issued at two music festivals in Ireland,
2025
Note: Issued by the Health Service Executive Safer Nightlife Programme to warn about highstrength MDMA products.
- 3 -

Drug checking indicates low levels of adulteration but concerns
about high MDMA content
While it is difficult to generalise due to limitations in national and European coverage, the available
information from drug checking services suggests that MDMA products are generally less subject
to adulteration than other illicit drugs that they screened in 2025. This does occur, however, as
illustrated by the detection of other substances in MDMA tablets. The proportion of MDMA
samples analysed by European drug checking services that were adulterated increased from 9% in
2024 to 15% in 2025, with cathinones, cocaine and ketamine being the most common other
unexpected substances found. In 2024 and 2025, the majority of MDMA samples submitted to
drug checking services continued to show high MDMA content (tablets) or high purity (powder),
creating health risks for consumers (Figure 5.3, Figure 5.4). 
Figure 5.3. Purity of MDMA powder samples submitted to drug checking services in 2024 and
2025
Source: Trans-European Drug Information network (TEDI). Data from 11 European drug checking services in 7 EU Member States, 2024
and 2025.
- 4 -

Figure 5.4. Content of MDMA tablet samples submitted to drug checking services in 2024 and
2025
Source: Trans-European Drug Information network (TEDI). Data from 11 European drug checking services in 7 EU Member States, 2024
and 2025.
See also EU Drug Markets: In-depth analysis and Stimulants: health and social responses.
Key data and trends
Prevalence and patterns of MDMA use
Surveys conducted by 27 EU Member States between 2015 and 2024 suggest that 2.4 million
young adults (aged 15 to 34) used MDMA in the last year (2.4% of this age group), with 2.1%
(1.0 million) of those aged 15 to 24 years estimated to have used MDMA in the last year (for
survey data, see Figure 5.5).
Of the 14 European countries that undertook surveys since 2023, 1 reported a lower estimate
than their previous comparable survey, 5 reported higher estimates and 8 reported stable
estimates.
- 5 -

Figure 5.5. Prevalence of MDMA ('ecstasy') use in Europe
This data explorer enables you to view our data on the prevalence of MDMA use by recall period
and age range. You can access data by country by clicking on the map or selecting a country from
the dropdown menu.
Notes: Prevalence data presented here are based on general population surveys submitted to the EUDA by national focal points. For the
latest data and detailed methodological information please see the Statistical Bulletin 2026: Prevalence of drug use.
Graphics showing the most recent data for a country are based on studies carried out between 2015 and 2024.
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, Greece, France, Italy and Hungary; 16-64
and 16-34 for Denmark, Estonia and Norway; 18-65 and 18-34 for Malta; 17-34 for Sweden.
Recall period
Last month
Last year
Lifetime
Age
Young adults (15-34)
All adults (15-64)
Country
- 6 -

In the 2024 ESPAD school survey, on average, 1.8% of the 15- to 16-year-old students reported
having used MDMA at least once in their lifetime.
Of the 78 cities in 22 EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye that have data on MDMA residues
in municipal wastewater for 2024 and 2025, 18 (23%) reported an increase, 12 (15%) a stable
situation and 48 (62%) a decrease (Figure 5.6).
Figure 5.6. MDMA residues in wastewater in selected European cities: changes between 2024
and 2025
Change with respect to previous year: Increase Stable Decrease 
 No previous data
Notes: Mean daily amounts of MDMA in milligrams per 1000 population. Sampling was carried out over a week between March and May
2025.
Taking into account statistical errors, values that differ by less than 10% from the previous value are considered stable in this figure.
Source: Sewage Analysis Core Group Europe (SCORE).
For the complete data set and analysis, see Wastewater analysis and drugs – a European multi-city study.
In the 2024 European Web Survey on Drugs, a non-representative survey of people who use
drugs, one third of respondents reported using MDMA/ecstasy in the last 12 months. Only 10%
- 7 -

indicated using it with no other substance on the last occasion: 70% used it with alcohol, 55%
with tobacco and 27% with herbal cannabis.
Deaths and hospital presentations related to MDMA
MDMA is reported in relatively small numbers of drug-induced deaths, and in most countries
fewer than 1 in 15 cases involve the drug.
In Germany, MDMA was mentioned in 6% (over 110) of the cases reported in 2024.
In some countries with full toxicology data available, a significant proportion of the MDMArelated deaths involved only MDMA. In Türkiye, MDMA was the only drug detected in almost
one quarter (23%) of such cases in 2024.
MDMA was the eighth most frequently reported drug in Euro-DEN Plus hospitals in 2024. The
drug was reported in 24 sentinel hospitals in 2024 and was involved in a median of 5.3% of
presentations across the 29 hospitals in the European Union and Norway. The median age of
those presenting with MDMA was 25 years; 68% were males.
Most MDMA cases were associated with polysubstance use. Alcohol was co-ingested with MDMA
in more than half (51%) of the cases with available information on alcohol ingestion. Cocaine,
cannabis and amphetamine were the drugs most commonly reported in presentations involving
MDMA.
MDMA market data
In 2024, EU Member States reported 24 000 seizures of MDMA (17 000 in 2023), amounting to
4.2 tonnes of MDMA powder (3.6 tonnes in 2023) and 10.7 million MDMA tablets (7.2 million in
2023). Türkiye seized 5.1 million MDMA tablets in 2024 (5.2 million in 2023) (Figure 5.7).
In 2024, 4 EU Member States reported dismantling 59 MDMA laboratories (36 in 2023): the
Netherlands reported 47, Spain 7, Belgium 4 and Germany 1.
Seizures of MDMA precursors totalled 23.9 tonnes in 2024 (63.1 tonnes in 2023), mainly in the
form of PMK and its glycidic derivatives. At least 24 sites producing PMK from alternative
chemicals were reported in 2024.
In 2024, MDMA tablets seized in Europe contained on average between 148 and 232 milligrams
of MDMA (138-158 milligrams in 2023), and the average purity of seized MDMA powders ranged
from 47% to 100% (24-100% in 2023), with half the countries reporting values in the range 6987% (67-88% in 2023) (Figure 5.7). The Netherlands, a key source country for the supply of
MDMA to Europe, reported an average MDMA content of ecstasy tablets of 137 milligrams and
74% purity for MDMA powders.
- 8 -

In 2025, a total of 5 857 samples sold as MDMA were tested for psychoactive adulterants by 14
drug checking services in 8 EU Member States. MDMA was the sole psychoactive substance in
85% of the samples, while the remaining 15% contained at least one other psychoactive
substance. In the 11 drug checking services in 7 countries that reported in 2024 and 2025,
synthetic cathinones were the most frequently detected of these, representing almost 4% of
samples sold as MDMA (Figure 5.8) (less than 2% in 2024). Cocaine was found in 2% of MDMA
samples tested in 2025, while ketamine was found in 1%.
- 9 -

Figure 5.7. MDMA market in Europe
Geographical coverage (selected graphs)
EU
EU+2
- 10 -

Notes: EU+2 refers to EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye.
Price, content and purity: national mean values – minimum, maximum and interquartile range.
Indexed trends refer to MDMA tablets. Countries covered vary by indicator.
- 11 -

Figure 5.8. Adulterants detected in samples sold as MDMA tablets or powder and tested in 14
European drug checking services in 2025
Source: Trans-European Drug Information network (TEDI). Data from 14 European drug checking services in 8 EU Member States,
collected between January and December 2025.
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
Prevalence of drug use data tables including general population surveys and wastewater
analysis (all substances)
View this data in our Data catalogue
- 12 -

Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-GPS-1. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, based on most recent general population
surveys (2024 or most recent year)
Table EDR26-GPS-2. Prevalence of drug use in Europe, trends
Table EDR26-WW-1. Mean weekly measurements by targeted substance from wastewater
analysis in selected European cities in 2025
Data tables specific to MDMA
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-MDMA-2. MDMA markets seizures source data, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-MDMA-5. Trends in the number of MDMA seizures
Table EDR26-MDMA-4. Trends in the quantity of MDMA seized: tablets
Table EDR26-MDMA-5. Trends in the quantity of MDMA seized: powder (tonnes)
Table EDR26-MDMA-6. MDMA price and purity or content data, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-MDMA-7. Price and MDMA content indexed trends
Table EDR26-MDMA-8. MDMA purity or content of samples submitted to drug checking services
(percent), 2024
Table EDR26-MDMA-9. Psychoactive adulterants detected in samples sold as MDMA to users
and tested in 12 European drug checking services, 2024
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/mdma_en. Some errors may have occurred
during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 13 -

Heroin and other opioids – the current
situation in Europe (European Drug Report
2026)
Heroin remains Europe’s most used illicit opioid and is
responsible for a large share of the health burden attributed
to illicit drug consumption. Europe’s opioid problem,
however, continues to evolve, creating new challenges. On
this page, you can find the latest analysis regarding heroin
and other opioids in Europe, including prevalence of use,
treatment demand, seizures, price and purity, harms and
more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Europe’s changing opioid market complicates
harm reduction and treatment
Treatment challenges
Heroin remains Europe’s most used illicit opioid, accounting for a large proportion of the health
burden attributed to illicit drug consumption. Europe’s opioid phenomenon, however, continues to
evolve in ways that are likely to have important implications for responses.
Data on entry into drug treatment and other indicators suggest that Europe’s heroin-using
population is ageing and possibly declining. Between 2014 and 2024, the mean age of all clients
entering specialist drug treatment for heroin use and for those doing so for the first time
increased, as did the proportion of older clients (Figure 6.1, Figure 6.2). Fewer people are now
entering treatment for heroin than for other opioids, including new synthetic opioids and the
opioid agonist medications methadone and buprenorphine. Services are now addressing more
complex patterns of drug use and a broader range of health and social support needs. These
include challenges linked to polysubstance use, prevention and treatment of age-related illness,
the need for effective multi-agency partnerships and referral pathways with general health and
social support services. In addition, opioid agonist treatment provision remains insufficient in
- 1 -

some EU Member States (see Opioid agonist treatment – the current situation in Europe). 
Figure 6.1. Age distribution of all clients entering treatment with heroin as their primary
drug, 2014 and 2024
Note: Based on data from 25 EU Member States and Türkiye.
Figure 6.2. Age distribution of never previously treated clients entering treatment with
heroin as their primary drug, 2014 and 2024
Note: Based on data from 24 EU Member States and Türkiye.
- 2 -

Risks from other opioids
While heroin continues to be involved in many opioid-related deaths in some countries, other
opioids are more prominent overall (see Drug-induced deaths – the current situation in Europe). In
acute drug toxicity presentations at Euro-DEN sentinel hospitals in 2024, heroin remained the most
commonly reported opioid, but in some cities other opioids – opioid agonist medicines, pain relief
medicines or potent new synthetic opioids – have overtaken heroin as a driver of presentations.
Polysubstance use involving opioids increases the risk of drug-induced death. Among those
entering specialised drug treatment services, injecting has decreased over the last decade, with
only 18% of new heroin clients reporting injection as their main route of administration (Figure 6.3
). Moreover, people who inject opioids are injecting a more diverse range of substances, including
other opioids, stimulants and new psychoactive substances, either alone or in combination with
other drugs (see also Injecting drug use in Europe – the current situation).
- 3 -

Figure 6.3. Trends in the main route of administration of clients entering treatment with
heroin as primary drug, by treatment status
Note: ‘Other' routes include eating/drinking, sniffing and unspecified main routes of administration. Trends are based on the 19 EU
Member States providing data over the period; only those with data for at least 9 of the 11 years are included. Missing values are
interpolated from adjacent years. Because of disruptions to services due to COVID-19, data for 2020, 2021 and 2022 should be
interpreted with caution.
Treatment status
First-time
Treatment status
Previously treated
- 4 -

Diversifying opium production and stockpiles supply Europe’s
resilient heroin market
Estimating opium and heroin supplies
The ban on opium poppy cultivation, introduced by the Taliban in April 2022, has greatly reduced
the production of opium and heroin in Afghanistan, the main source of Europe’s heroin. The
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) estimated a 95% drop in opium cultivation in
2023, to 10 800 hectares, down from 232 000 hectares in 2022, with similar estimates for 2024
(12 800 hectares) and 2025 (10 200 hectares). High-resolution satellite analysis using census-based
methodology by Alcis , a geospatial analysis company, suggests a substantial increase in
cultivation from 7 382 hectares in 2024 to 12 818 hectares in 2025. Estimates of Afghan opium
production in 2025 differ, with Alcis estimating opium output at 414 tonnes and the UNODC
estimating 296 tonnes. Based on its opium production estimate, the UNODC estimates a potential
export quality heroin production of 22-34 tonnes, far below the 350-580 tonnes of heroin
estimated for 2022.Our most recent estimate of heroin demand in the European Union was that
124 tonnes of heroin (range 97 to 155 tonnes) at retail-level purity was consumed in 2021.
Diversifying opium suppliers and stocks
The relative stability of heroin availability in Europe is partly attributed to Afghanistan’s large
stockpiles, estimated in an Alcis report to the EUDA at around 12 000 tonnes of opium in 2025,
advanced processing and adulteration practices, and tactical supply management by trafficking
networks. These factors appear to have sustained heroin supply levels to date, despite declining
opium cultivation in Afghanistan. Pakistan, particularly the province of Balochistan, bordering
Afghanistan and home to major seaports, has also emerged as a source of opium and heroin, with
satellite imagery analysis suggesting around 9 116 hectares of opium poppy cultivation in 2025,
potentially rivalling Afghanistan’s output in 2025 (see Understanding Europe’s drug situation in
2026). The emergence of regional sources, such as Pakistan, highlights the role of the ‘southern
route’, a maritime corridor linking South Asia to Europe, in heroin trafficking to Europe. See also
Drug supply, production and precursors – the current situation in Europe.
Vigilance needed to detect drug market shifts
While a sustained decrease in heroin production in Afghanistan could eventually lead traffickers to
seek alternative sources, fully replacing heroin from Afghanistan with other sources such as
Myanmar would be difficult due to Afghanistan’s relative proximity and historically large
production and trafficking volumes. Nonetheless, it is notable that UNODC estimates that opium
poppy cultivation in Myanmar reached a ten-year peak of 45 200 to 53 100 hectares in 2025, and
trade routes between South-East Asia and Europe are growing. European countries should remain
vigilant for signs of market shifts, such as increased synthetic opioid or stimulant use. While supply
constraints are evident, market resilience, supported by stockpiles, trafficking adaptations and
- 5 -

regional production, will likely maintain heroin availability in Europe, with large seizures still
occurring in countries on key trafficking routes (Figure 6.4).
Figure 6.4. Large seizures of heroin concealed in cable machines and mattresses, Bulgaria,
2024
Note: Drugs seized by the National Customs Agency of Bulgaria.
Life-threatening new synthetic opioids remain available in Europe
New synthetic opioids play a relatively small role in Europe’s drug market. However, they represent
a significant problem in the Baltic countries, and signals suggest they have the potential to
become more prominent in Europe’s drug problems overall. Highly potent synthetic opioids, such
as fentanyl and its derivatives, including carfentanil, as well as nitazenes and orphines, are
reported to the EU Early Warning System annually. Minuscule amounts of these substances are
needed to make a retail-level dose. Reflecting a broadening of overdose risk, in 2024 authorities in
10 countries detected more than 50 000 nitazene‐containing tablets, up from 23 000 in 2023 and
only 380 in 2022 (see New psychoactive substances in Europe – the current situation).
Fentanyl availability and deaths raise concern
Several indicators suggest that fentanyl has become more widely available in Bulgaria, where it is
associated with serious harms including fatalities. During 2024, police seized multiple kilograms of
material containing fentanyl in operations across Bulgaria. Fentanyl is believed to be sourced
abroad and imported. Over the period 2024-2025, fentanyl has been associated with over 100
drug-induced deaths in Bulgaria. Fentanyl-related deaths and hospitalisations, initially reported
mainly in Sofia, were observed in other Bulgarian cities in 2025. In the context of limited harm
reduction service provision, including the absence of take-home naloxone programmes, this is of
particular concern.
The repeated large seizures, geographical spread and unidentified fentanyl production and
trafficking sources create the potential for further fentanyl problems in Bulgaria and possibly
- 6 -

elsewhere. Elsewhere in Europe, four seizures of the fentanyl precursor N-boc-4-piperidone
totalling 30 kilograms were reported by Spain and the Netherlands at the end of 2024. It remains
unknown if these precursors were destined for EU production facilities or transiting through
Europe to non-EU locations when seized.
Responding to shifting opioid risks
Enhancing preparedness remains critical to Europe’s ability to respond rapidly to poisoning
outbreaks related to highly potent synthetic opioids or the increased use of other drugs, such as
cocaine, amphetamines or synthetic cathinones, as replacement substances during reduced
availability of heroin. Enhancing EU and national preparedness to anticipate and respond to drugrelated health and security threats is a central pillar of the EU Drugs Strategy. Enhancing access to
opioid agonist treatment, needle and syringe exchanges and take-home naloxone remain key
tools for addressing current opioid problems and ensuring resilience in the fact of potential
market shifts. Monitoring the drugs available at retail level in local drug markets is vital for
identifying sudden changes in substances for sale and the emergence of dangerous batches of
drugs. The EU Early Warning System will continue to play a key role in this regard, as will the
EUDA’s new drug alert and threat assessment systems.
See also Opioids: health and social responses.
Key data and trends
Prevalence of opioid use
It is estimated that 0.3% of the EU adult population, or around 850 000 people, used opioids in
2024 (860 000 in 2023).
Treatment entry for use of heroin and other opioids
Opioid use was reported as the main reason for entering specialised drug treatment by 68 000
clients in 2024, representing 21% of all those entering drug treatment in Europe.
Heroin was the primary drug for 10 000 (64%) of the 18 000 first-time entrants who reported a
specific opioid as their main problem drug. Another 3 400 first-time opioid treatment clients did
not specify their primary drug.
The available data suggest that the long-term downward trend in the number of people
entering treatment for heroin use has continued (Figure 6.5), while diverse opioids (e.g. misused
medications, new synthetic opioids) are increasingly cited as the main reason for entering
treatment.
- 7 -

An estimated 505 000 clients received opioid agonist treatment in EU Member States in 2024
(511 000 in 2023).
- 8 -

Figure 6.5. Users entering treatment for heroin in Europe
- 9 -

Notes: Apart from trends, data are for all treatment entrants with heroin as the primary drug – 2024 or the most recent year available.
Trends in first-time entrants are based on 26 countries. Only countries with data for at least 6 of the 7 years are included in the trends
analysis. Missing values are interpolated from adjacent years. Because of disruptions to services due to COVID-19, data for 2020, 2021,
and 2022 should be interpreted with caution. Missing data were imputed with values from the previous year for Spain and France (2023)
and Germany (2019).
Harms related to opioid use
Opioids, including heroin and its metabolites, often in combination with other substances, were
estimated to be present in around 7 out of 10 fatal overdoses in the European Union in 2024,
often in combination with other substances (see Drug-induced deaths – the current situation in
Europe).
In 2024, heroin was the fourth most frequently reported drug in acute drug toxicity
presentations in Euro-DEN Plus hospitals in the European Union and Norway, accounting for
10% of all cases. Presentations involving heroin were reported in 21 of the 29 hospitals (Figure
6.6). The median age of those presenting with heroin was 37 years; 75% were males.
In 13 of the 21 hospitals reporting heroin in 2024, no cases were younger than 25 years.
Depending on the hospital, the drugs most often reported together with heroin were
benzodiazepines, cocaine and amphetamine.
- 10 -

Figure 6.6a. Proportion of acute drug toxicity presentations with mention of heroin in EuroDEN Plus hospitals, 2024
- 11 -

Figure 6.6b. Trends in the proportion of presentations with mention of heroin in 2016-2024,
in selected Euro-DEN Plus hospitals
Data source: Euro-DEN. For the complete data set and analysis, see European Drug Emergencies Network (Euro-DEN Plus): data and
analysis.
Heroin and other opioids market data
Seizures of heroin reported by EU Member States have declined from 9.5 tonnes in 2021 to
3.6 tonnes in 2024, with year-on-year declines of 16% (to 8.0 tonnes) in 2022, 33% (to 5.4 tonnes)
in 2023 and a further 33% in 2024. The quantity seized in 2024 is similar to the quantities seized
in 2015 (3.7 tonnes) and 2016 (3.5 tonnes).
Overall, EU Member States reported 15 500 heroin seizures in 2024 (17 000 seizures in 2023).
France (1.045 tonnes), Bulgaria (868 kilograms) and the Netherlands (376 kilograms) reported
the largest quantities. Türkiye seized 4.3 tonnes of heroin in 2024, 31% more than in 2023
(3.3 tonnes).
The average purity of brown heroin at the retail level ranged from 8% to 33% in 2024, with half
of the countries reporting an average purity between 10% and 21%. Indexed trends indicate the
average price of brown heroin declined by 25% between 2014 and 2024. Over the same period,
the purity of the drug fluctuated but has fallen markedly over the last four years (Figure 6.7).
- 12 -

Countries reported 1 063 seizures of synthetic opioids, amounting to 35.5 kilograms, to the EU
Early Warning System in 2024, an increase from the 22 kilograms seized in 2023. The quantity of
nitazenes seized decreased, from 10 to 7 kilograms seized in 2024. Of the seizures of new
opioids reported, 26% contained metonitazene, 25% contained carfentanil, 22% contained
tramadol and 10% contained protonitazene. Of the 35.5 kilograms of material seized, 31%
(11.1 kilograms) contained 2-methyl-AP-237, 21% (7.6 kilograms) contained tramadol and 16%
(5.6 kilograms) contained spirochlorphine. A small number of countries accounted for most of
the synthetic opioid seizures: Germany, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania reported 62% of the
seizures and 70% (25.0 kilograms) of the quantity seized. 
Approximately 19 000 offences for heroin use or possession were reported in 2024.
Twenty sites involved in the cutting and packaging of heroin were dismantled in the European
Union in 2024 (15 in the Netherlands, 4 in Czechia, 1 in Italy).
- 13 -

Figure 6.7. Heroin market in Europe
Geographical coverage (selected graphs)
EU
EU+2
- 14 -

Notes: EU+2 refers to EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye.
- 15 -

Indexed trends show the price and purity of brown heroin base: national mean values – minimum, maximum and interquartile range.
Countries covered vary by indicator.
Table 6.1. Other opioids: number of seizures and quantities seized, 2024
Substance
Countries Number of seizures Weight (kg) Tablets
Litres Patches
Buprenorphine
16
3217
5
180587
12
Carfentanil
3
32
2
>0.1
Codeine
13
316
65
62297
2.2
Fentanyl derivatives 14
119
>1
1085018 116
299
Methadone
20
1046
16
126152
18.7
Morphine
14
982
25
18605
2
Nitazene analogues 3
385
4
28435
>0.1
Opium
12
536
237
167
>0.1
Oxycodone
11
1495
2
72677
54.6
Tramadol
15
3600
460
1911879 >0.1
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-TDI-1. Treatment demand indicator (TDI) source data, client characteristics, 2024
or most recent year. Percentages except where otherwise stated
Table EDR26-Heroin-1. Age distribution of all clients entering treatment with heroin as their
primary drug, 2010 and 2024 (%)
Table EDR26-Heroin-2. Age distribution of never previously treated clients entering treatment
with heroin as their primary drug, 2010 and 2024 (%)
Table EDR26-Heroin-3. Trends in first-time heroin treatment entrants
Table EDR26-Heroin-4. Trends in the main route of administration of clients entering treatment
with heroin as primary drug, by treatment status (%)
Table EDR26-Heroin-5. Heroin markets seizures source data
Table EDR26-Heroin-6. Trends in the number of heroin seizures (x 1000)
- 16 -

Table EDR26-Heroin-7. Trends in the quantities of heroin seizures (tonnes)
Table EDR26-Heroin-8. Price, potency data for heroin
Table EDR26-Heroin-9. Price and purity/potency indexed trends, heroin
Table EDR26-Heroin-10a. Proportion of the acute drug toxicity presentations with heroin
involved in 2023
Table EDR26-Heroin-10b.Trends in the proportion of the acute drug toxicity presentations with
heroin involved in selected hospitals in Europe
Table EDR26-Heroin-12. Other opioids: number of seizures and quantities seized, 2023
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/heroin-and-other-opioids_en. Some errors may
have occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web
page.
- 17 -

New psychoactive substances – the current
situation in Europe (European Drug Report
2026)
The market for new psychoactive substances is characterised
by the large number of substances that have emerged, with
new compounds being detected each year. On this page, you
can find an overview regarding new psychoactive substances
in Europe, supported by information from the EU Early
Warning System on seizures and substances detected for the
first time in Europe. New substances covered include
synthetic and semi-synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic
cathinones and new synthetic opioids.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Record volumes and hazardous new
substances highlight market adaptation
driving health risks
Concern continues to grow about the integration of the markets for new psychoactive substances
and illicit drugs and the response complications this raises, including addressing inadvertent
consumption. Reflecting the relentless efforts of drug production and distribution networks, for
the fifth year in a row, law enforcement agencies in EU Member States reported a record quantity
of new psychoactive substances to the EU Early Warning System, amounting to 55 tonnes
imported or seized. New and harmful substances continue to be created to circumvent legal
controls, with 50 new psychoactive substances notified for the first time in 2025. In addition,
around 400 previously reported new substances were detected on the market in 2024.
In general, the health risks from consuming these novel compounds are poorly understood,
although some expose consumers to the risk of severe or even fatal poisonings and other health
problems. Legislative controls and other regulatory measures taken in Europe and non-EU source
countries have contributed to a reduction in the number of new psychoactive substances
- 1 -

appearing for the first time annually, particularly substances specifically targeted, such as fentanyl
derivatives and synthetic cannabinoids. Other substances, however, designed to evade legislation,
continue to emerge, with China and India remaining important source countries for these
substances or the precursors needed to produce them.
Highly potent synthetic cannabinoids in various forms pose risk
of poisoning
In 2025, European countries identified 27 new cannabinoids, 16 of which were semi-synthetic
cannabinoids, representing over 50% of the new substances first reported to the EU Early Warning
System that year.
Vulnerable populations, including people in prison or experiencing homelessness, are particularly
affected by the public health risks posed by synthetic cannabinoids, which are often highly potent
and carry poisoning risks. These compounds may be mis-sold or used to adulterate cannabis and
semi-synthetic cannabinoid products without the consumers’ knowledge, increasing the risk of
poisonings. Cannabis edibles, which include foods such as sweets infused with cannabis extract,
represent an evolving risk as they have become more available on Europe’s illicit market.
After China implemented generic legal controls in July 2021, the supply of synthetic cannabinoids
to European markets diminished. This led to a marked reduction in the availability of dominant
compounds, such as MDMB-4en-PINACA and ADB-BUTINACA. There are now signals that the
manufacture of these substances has shifted to Europe, near consumer markets. These include
reports of dismantled production laboratories (Figure 7.1) and seizures in 2023 of 148 kilograms of
MDMB-INACA, which can be used to manufacture various cannabinoids, including MDMB-4enPINACA. In 2024, over 107 kilograms of powder and 130 litres of MDMB-4en-PINACA were seized in
the Netherlands.
Figure 7.1. Seized warehouse and laboratory producing synthetic cannabinoids in Greece,
2023
Source: Greek Police, Central Anti-drug Co-ordination Unit – National Intelligence Unit (SODNEMP), General Chemical State Laboratory.
Concerns also exist about the increasing adulteration of low-THC cannabis and CBD products with
synthetic cannabinoids, the re-emergence of ‘legal high’-type products and increased vaping of e-
- 2 -

liquids containing these substances. In September 2025, Czechia reported an outbreak of
poisonings linked to a new synthetic cannabinoid, MDMB-PINACA, sold in ‘legal high’ type products
(Figure 7.2).
Figure 7.2. Products containing the synthetic cannabinoids MDMB-PINACA and MDMB-4enPINACA linked to poisonings in Czechia, September 2025
Source: Czech Reitox national focal point.
Continued availability of semi-synthetic cannabinoids creates
health concerns
Semi-synthetic cannabinoids are chemically modified forms of the cannabinoids found in the
cannabis plant. They were first reported in Europe in 2022, marketed as legal alternatives to
cannabis and delta-9-THC. By the end of 2025, a total of 40 semi-synthetic cannabinoids had been
identified on European drug markets. HHC (hexahydrocannabinol) was the first of these
substances to be identified, and it was placed under international control in December 2025.
Reflecting the cycle of creating new substances to circumvent legal controls, other semi-synthetic
cannabinoids are now available in Europe as replacements for HHC, including
hexahydrocannabinol acetate (HHC acetate) and hexahydrocannabiphorol (HHC-P).
While initially most semi-synthetic cannabinoids were imported from the United States, they are
now also produced in Europe (Figure 7.3). Production has evolved from CBD-derived compounds
from low-THC cannabis, such as HHC, to now include products such as HHC-P, which seem to be
fully synthetic.
- 3 -

Figure 7.3. Semi-synthetic cannabinoids production facility dismantled in 2023 by
Romanian police
Source: DIICOT – Iasi Territorial Service, operation ‘Dream Factory’.
Although the effects of semi-synthetic cannabinoids on humans remain poorly studied, reports
suggest they are similar to those of cannabis, with adverse reactions ranging from mild to severe
poisoning, sometimes requiring treatment in hospital. Some countries report increasing numbers
of poisoning cases involving these substances. The pharmacological similarity of semi-synthetic
cannabinoids to delta-9-THC raises concerns about their potential to trigger psychotic episodes as
well as their abuse and dependence potential.
Semi-synthetic cannabinoids are widely available online and, in some countries, through physical
retail outlets, including vape shops and stores selling low-THC cannabis and CBD products. They
may also be sold in convenience stores and via vending machines. The main products are
flavoured edibles and vapes and low-THC cannabis sprayed or mixed with the cannabinoids. Their
accessibility and perceived legal status may attract both cannabis users and first-time users,
potentially including children and young adults. The resemblance of edibles to common foods,
especially sweets, poses accidental consumption risks, particularly for children.
Laboratory analysis reveals that products and batches can differ widely in the type and
concentrations of semi-synthetic cannabinoids present, with some containing very high amounts.
Products may include undeclared cannabinoids, such as delta-9-THC or delta-8-THC, or novel semisynthetic compounds in high doses, which may pose a risk of poisoning. Overall, such variability
and unpredictability add to the risk of poisonings.
The rapid spread of vapes and edibles – especially gummies – is particularly concerning from a
public health perspective. Their accessibility and appeal may attract new, possibly younger,
- 4 -

consumers who might not otherwise use or have access to illicit cannabis or want to smoke
cannabinoids. In addition, the slower absorption of cannabinoids from edibles and the later onset
of initial effects compared with vaping or smoking can lead to users consuming multiple portions,
risking toxic doses.
Imports and production fuel crossover of synthetic cathinones
into illicit drug markets
Synthetic cathinones have become established as replacements for stimulants such as
amphetamine and cocaine in some parts of Europe. While inadvertent consumption in drug
mixtures and tablets remains a concern, some consumers may consider these different stimulants
to be functionally equivalent in terms of their effects and intentionally seek them out as affordable
alternatives. In 2025, four new cathinones were notified, while 69 previously reported synthetic
cathinones were also detected on the EU drug market in 2024. Reports to the EU Early Warning
System indicate that N-ethylnorpentedrone (NEP) was being increasingly mis-sold as another
cathinone, 3-MMC, in 2025, leading to unintended consumption and increased poisonings.
Reported seizures and imports of synthetic cathinones in the European Union increased by
11.5 tonnes to 48.5 tonnes in 2024, with preliminary data indicating continued large quantities
through the first half of 2025. A small number of bulk imports from India, primarily through the
Netherlands, accounted for most of the reported material. In July 2025, the Netherlands
introduced generic (all-encompassing) legal controls covering synthetic cathinones, which may
significantly affect their importation. 
Responding to evidence of the increasing availability and associated health harms, in 2025, the
EUDA Scientific Committee carried out risk assessments on three cathinones: 2methylmethcathinone (2-MMC), 4-bromomethcathinone (4-BMC) and N-ethylnorpentedrone (NEP).
Based on the assessments, the Commission adopted legislation subjecting these substances to EU
drug control measures in January 2026.
The continuation of large seizures of precursors in 2024 and the dismantling of 65 illicit
laboratories suggest that the production of synthetic cathinones remains significant within the
European Union, particularly in Poland (Figure 7.4) (see also Drug supply, production and
precursors – the current situation in Europe). While 3-MMC, 3-CMC and 2-MMC have been the
dominant cathinones in recent years, less common cathinones such as alphapyrrolidinoisohexanophenone (alpha-PHiP, sometimes sold as ‘Flakka’) can create localised health
problems and are difficult to monitor. These smaller-scale trends may miss early detection by
public health agencies, potentially causing serious harm before being identified.
- 5 -

Figure 7.4. Part of a seizure of 185 kilograms of synthetic cathinones seized at a dismantled
synthetic drug production laboratory in Pyskowice, Poland, 2024
Source: Central Bureau of Police Investigation.
Availability of new synthetic opioids remains a potentially
lethal threat
New synthetic opioids are often highly potent, posing an increased risk of life‐threatening
poisoning. Since 2019, fentanyl derivatives in Europe have been largely replaced by benzimidazole
‘nitazene’ opioids and, more recently, by benzimidazolone ‘orphine’ opioids. Seven new synthetic
opioids were formally notified to the EU Early Warning System in 2025, including three nitazenes
and three orphines. Since 2019, at least 21 EU Member States have reported a nitazene and at
least 10 have reported an orphine.
- 6 -

Figure 7.5. Fake oxycodone tablets containing metonitazene, seized in Sweden in 2023
Source: Swedish Customs Laboratory.
Reports of poisonings linked to nitazene opioids, including fatal cases, have been increasing in
some European countries since 2022. In 2024, the quantity of nitazene powders seized in Europe
decreased to 7 kilograms, while over 5 kilograms of powders containing orphine opioids were
reported. The high potency of these substances means minuscule amounts can make retail-level
doses or mixes. The EU Early Warning System has received increasing reports of fake medicines
containing nitazene opioids (Figure 7.5). These products typically mimic legitimate prescription
medications, particularly oxycodone and, to a lesser extent, benzodiazepines such as diazepam
and alprazolam. Their seemingly authentic appearance may contribute to a false sense of security
among consumers. Although predominantly used by high‐risk opioid users, such tablets may also
be used by other groups, including people experiencing chronic pain. There are concerns that they
- 7 -

may spread among populations without opioid tolerance, including young people. In 2024, 10
countries detected more than 50 000 nitazene‐containing tablets, up from 23 000 in 2023 and 380
in 2022. Preliminary data for 2025 indicate further detections in at least seven EU Member States.
In addition, Bulgaria reported more than 100 fentanyl-related deaths over the period 2024-2025.
The Taliban’s ban on opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan since April 2022 has significantly
reduced opium production, but its impact on heroin availability in Europe remains uncertain. Any
emerging supply gap could, in some countries, be partially filled by new synthetic opioids and
other substances.
Figure 7.6. Cychlorphine mis-sold online as a benzodiazepine pro-drug (alprazolam
triazolobenzophenone pellets), Germany, September 2025
Source: University of Freiburg Clinic.
In view of generic controls on nitazene opioids introduced by China in July 2025, and preliminary
evidence that these measures may substantially reduce nitazene availability in Europe, novel
opioid families are candidates to fill this emerging gap in the opioids market. One possible
replacement is the ‘orphine’ family of opioids: 11 countries have reported detecting cychlorphine
and 6 have detected spirochlorphine. Between June 2024 and January 2026, 5 EU Member States
reported 5 cases of acute non-fatal poisoning and 18 deaths with confirmed exposure to orphines,
mostly cychlorphine (Figure 7.6). Estonia and Latvia have reported injecting use of both
substances. While limited pharmacological data are available for these substances, their structural
- 8 -

similarity to brorphine, a potent opioid, suggests that a key health risk is likely to be respiratory
depression (see also Heroin and other opioids – the current situation in Europe).
These developments underscore key preparedness challenges for the European Union and
Member States. In particular, national early warning systems and their associated laboratory
networks must maintain readiness to detect and respond to emerging new synthetic opioids, such
as the orphines. More generally, the availability of highly potent synthetic opioids requires us to
review whether the current approaches used to prevent, treat and reduce the harms related to
opioid use remain fit for purpose and whether existing systems have the capacity to respond
effectively (see also Opioid agonist treatment – the current situation in Europe and Harm reduction
– the current situation in Europe).
See also the 2024 EUDA-Europol EU Drug Market: New psychoactive substances – In-depth analysis
and the EUDA’s Health and social responses to drug problems: a European guide.
Key data and trends
New psychoactive substances reported
At the end of 2025, the EUDA was monitoring 1 050 new psychoactive substances, 50 of which
were first reported in Europe in 2025 (Figure 7.7 and Table 7.1).
Approximately 400 new psychoactive substances were detected in seizures in 2024 (Figure 7.8).
In 2025, the EU Early Warning System received reports of 27 new cannabinoids, bringing the
total number being monitored to 304.
Since 2009, a total of 95 new opioids have been identified on the European drug market, with 7
new substances notified in 2025, 6 of which were highly potent new opioids: nitazenes (3) and
orphines (3), which can be hundreds of times more potent than heroin. To date, 25 nitazenes
have been identified in Europe (Figure 7.9).
- 9 -

Figure 7.7. Number of new psychoactive substances reported for the first time to the EU
Early Warning System, by category, 2005-2025
- 10 -

Figure 7.8. Number of new psychoactive substances reported each year following their first
identification in the European Union, by category, 2005-2025
- 11 -

Figure 7.9. Number of new opioids reported for the first time to the EU Early Warning
System, 2009-2025
Seizures of new psychoactive substances
In 2024, EU Member States accounted for approximately 54 600 of the 184 000 seizure or
import cases of new psychoactive substances reported in the European Union, Norway and
Türkiye, representing 99.8% of the 55.1 tonnes reported (41.4 tonnes in 2023) (Figure 7.10). The
increase was driven by a small number of cases involving cathinones (2-MMC, NEP) (Figure 7.11).
In addition, approximately 11 700 litres of liquids containing new psychoactive substances were
seized, mainly 4-CMC (564 litres) and H4-CBD (416 litres).
In 2024, just 5 substances accounted for almost 90% of the quantity of new psychoactive
substances reported by EU law enforcement agencies: 4 cathinones (2-MMC, NEP, 4-CMC and
MDPHP, amounting to 44 tonnes) and HHC (3.2 tonnes) (Figure 7.11).
- 12 -

Figure 7.10. Seizures of new psychoactive substances in the European Union, 2006-2024
(a) Number of seizures
Figure 7.10. Seizures of new psychoactive substances in the European Union, 2006-2024
(b) Quantity seized
- 13 -

Figure 7.11. Seizures of new psychoactive substances in the European Union: percentage of
total quantity seized, by substance, 2024
Note: Based on all physical forms expressed in kilograms.
In 2024, a total of 24 countries reported seizing 110 kilograms (100 kilograms in 2023) of
synthetic cannabinoids and 1 320 kilograms (154 kilograms in 2023) of semi-synthetic
cannabinoids as herbal material. The quantity of synthetic cannabinoid powder seized increased
in 2024, with 159 kilograms of material seized in a small number of seizures. With 3.2 tonnes
and 200 litres, HHC accounted for most of the semi-synthetic cannabinoids seized. Edibles and
vape products containing synthetic cannabinoids or semi-synthetic cannabinoids accounted for
around 37% of the seized material, amounting to 1.9 tonnes, reported by 18 countries.
Countries reported 1 063 seizures and 35.5 kilograms of synthetic opioids to the EU Early
Warning System in 2024, an increase from the 22 kilograms seized in 2023. The quantity of
nitazenes seized decreased, from 10 to 7 kilograms seized in 2024. Of the seizures of new
opioids reported, 26% contained metonitazene, 25% contained carfentanil, 22% contained
tramadol and 10% contained protonitazene. A total of 35.5 kilograms of material was seized,
with 31% (11.1 kilograms) containing 2-methyl-AP-237, 21% (7.6 kilograms) containing tramadol
and 16% (5.6 kilograms) containing spirochlorphine. A small number of countries accounted for
most of the synthetic opioid seizures: Germany, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania reported 62% of
the seizures and 70% (25.0 kilograms) of the quantity seized.
- 14 -

Prevalence of new psychoactive substances use
National estimates of last year use of new psychoactive substances (excluding ketamine and
GHB) among young adults (aged 15 to 34) range from 0.1% in Latvia and Norway to 2.9% in
Bulgaria. National estimates of last year use of cathinones among young adults (aged 15 to 34)
range from 0.1% in Romania to 4.4% in the Netherlands.
The 2024 ESPAD school survey estimated that among 15- to 16-year-old students in the
European Union, the average lifetime use of new psychoactive substances was 2.6%, ranging
from 0.6% to 6.4%. Lifetime use ranged from 0.7% to 16% for synthetic cannabinoids, 1.1% to
3.7% for synthetic cathinones and 0.6% to 2.2% for synthetic opioids.
In the 2024 European Web Survey on Drugs, a non-representative survey of people who use
drugs, 16% of respondents had used new psychoactive substances in the last 12 months. Of
those respondents, 21% reported using the substances alongside herbal cannabis and 15% with
MDMA/ecstasy in the last episode of use. With regard to the substances used in the last 12
months, 14% of respondents reported having used semi-synthetic cannabinoids, 3% synthetic
cannabinoids and 9% synthetic cathinones. Around 70% of the respondents who had used new
psychoactive substances stated that they consumed the drug ‘to get high or for fun’.
- 15 -

Table 7.1. Notifications of new psychoactive substances under the terms of Regulation (EU)
2023/1322 and Council Framework Decision 2004/757/JHA – 2025
Common name
IUPAC name
EUDA classification
Date of
formal
notification
Country
Tilmetamine
2-(methylamino)-2-(thiophen-2-yl)cyclohexan-1-one
Arylcyclohexylamine 28/11/2025
Finland
Ethylbromazolam
8-bromo-1-ethyl-6-phenyl-4H-[1,2,4]triazolo[4,3a][1,4]benzodiazepine
Benzodiazepines
24/09/2025
Sweden
Rilmazolam
8-chloro-6-(2-chlorophenyl)-N,N-dimethyl-4H-
[1,2,4]triazolo[1,5-a][1,4]benzodiazepine-2-carboxamide
Benzodiazepines
15/04/2025
Germany
1’-Ethyl-HHC
3-(heptan-3-yl)-6,6,9-trimethyl-6a,7,8,9,10,10a-hexahydro-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
Cannabinoids
06-03-2025
Sweden
2-Allyl-delta-8-THC
6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-2-(prop-2-en-1-yl)-6a,7,10,10atetrahydro-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
Cannabinoids
02-10-2025
Sweden
2-Allyl-delta-8-THCmethylcarbonate
6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-2-(prop-2-en-1-yl)-6a,7,10,10atetrahydro-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl carbonate
Cannabinoids
02-10-2025
Germany
2-Allyl-delta-8-THC-Oacetate
6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-2-(prop-2-en-1-yl)-6a,7,10,10atetrahydro-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl acetate
Cannabinoids
19/12/2025
Germany
2-Allyl-delta-9-THC
6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-2-(prop-2-en-1-yl)-6a,7,8,10atetrahydro-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
Cannabinoids
02-10-2025
Germany
2-Br-HHC-O-acetate
2-bromo-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6a,7,8,9,10,10a-hexahydro6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl acetate
Cannabinoids
07-08-2025
Slovenia
2-Formyl-delta-9-THCP
6,6,9-trimethyl-3-heptyl-2-formyl-6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
Cannabinoids
19/12/2025
Germany
4F-ADMB-BINACA
N-(1-amino-3,3-dimethyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl)-1-(4-fluorobutyl)-
1H-indazole-3-carboxamide
Cannabinoids
11-11-2025
France
4F-MDMB-PINACA
N-(1-amino-3,3-dimethyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl)-1-(4-fluorobutyl)-
1H-indazole-3-carboxamide
Cannabinoids
11-11-2025
France
ADMB-5en-HEXINACA
N-(1-amino-3,3-dimethyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl)-1-(hex-5en-1-yl)-
1H-indazole-3-carboxamide
Cannabinoids
04-07-2025
Denmark
ADMB-FUBBIOCA
N-(1-amino-3,3-dimethyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl)-3-[(4fluorophenyl)methyl]-2-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-1,3benzimidazole-1-carboxamide
Cannabinoids
18/12/2025
Germany
CH-BINACA
1-butyl-N-cyclohexyl-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide
Cannabinoids
11-08-2025
Germany
CUMYL-FUBINACA
1-[(4-fluorophenyl)methyl]-N-(2-phenylpropan-2-yl)-1Hindazole-3-carboxamide
Cannabinoids
11-08-2025
Germany
CUMYL-PMINACA
1-pentyl-N-(2-phenylpropan-2-yl)-4,5,6,7-tetrahydro-1H-4,7methanoindazole-3-carboxamide
Cannabinoids
12-11-2025
Germany
Delta-8-THCmethylcarbonate
methyl 6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydro-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl carbonate
Cannabinoids
01-10-2025
Germany
Delta-9-THCB-Obutanoate
3-butyl-6,6,9-trimethyl-6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl butanoate
Cannabinoids
29/07/2025
Sweden
Delta-9-THCPmethylcarbonate
methyl 6,6,9-trimethyl-3-heptyl-6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl carbonate
Cannabinoids
19/12/2025
Germany
Delta-9-THCP-Obutanoate
3-heptyl-6,6,9-trimethyl-6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl butanoate
Cannabinoids
29/07/2025
Sweden
EDMB-4en-PINACA
ethyl 3,3-dimethyl-2-{[1-(pent-4-en-1-yl)-1H-indazole-3carbonyl]amino}butanoate
Cannabinoids
07-08-2025
Italy
- 16 -

Common name
IUPAC name
EUDA classification Date offormal
notification
Country
HHC-C8
3-octyl-6a,7,8,9,10,10a-hexahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
Cannabinoids
01-08-2025
Ireland
HHC-C9
3-nonyl-6a,7,8,9,10,10a-hexahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-ol
Cannabinoids
16/04/2025
Italy
HHCH-O-acetate
3-hexyl-6,6,9-trimethyl-6a,7,8,9,10,10a-hexahydro-6Hdibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl acetate
Cannabinoids
16/07/2025
Germany
HHCP-TBDMS
tert-butyl[(3-heptyl-6,6,9-trimethyl-6a,7,8,9,10,10ahexahydro-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl)oxy]di(methyl)silane
Cannabinoids
19/12/2025
Sweden
HHC-TBDMS
tert-butyl[(3-pentyl-6,6,9-trimethyl-6a,7,8,9,10,10ahexahydro-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-1-yl)oxy]di(methyl)silane
Cannabinoids
19/12/2025
Sweden
MADMB-4en-PINACA
N-[3,3-dimethyl-1-(methylamino)-1-oxobutan-2-yl]-1-(pent-4en-1-yl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide
Cannabinoids
27/11/2025
France
MDMB-PINACA
methyl 3,3-dimethyl-2-[(1-pentyl-1H-indazole-3carbonyl)amino]butanoate
Cannabinoids
01-07-2025
Denmark
MMB-PINACA
methyl 3-methyl-2-[(1-pentyl-1H-indazole-3carbonyl)amino]butanoate
Cannabinoids
14/07/2025
Germany
3,4-EtMC
1-(bicyclo[4.2.0]octa-1,3,5-trien-3-yl)-2-(methylamino)propan1-one
Cathinones
20/01/2025
Austria
3’,4’-Dimethyl-α-PVP
1-(3,4-dimethylphenyl)-2-(pyrrolidin-1-yl)pentan-1-one
Cathinones
04-09-2025
Sweden
4’-Ph-PVP
1-([1,1'-biphenyl]-4-yl)-2-(pyrrolidin-1-yl)pentan-1-one
Cathinones
11-04-2025
Portugal
α-PiHPP
5-methyl-1-phenyl-2-(pyrrolidin-1-yl)hexan-1-one
Cathinones
02-12-2025
Portugal
5,6-Dichloro
desmethylchlorphine
5,6-dichloro-1-{1-[(4-chlorophenyl)methyl]piperidin-4-yl}-1,3dihydro-2H-benzimidazol-2-one
Opioids
20/06/2025
Germany
Cychlorphine
3-(3-{1-[1-(4-chlorophenyl)ethyl]piperidin-4-yl}-2-oxo-2,3dihydro-1H-1,3-benzimidazol-1-yl)propanenitrile
Opioids
24/02/2025
Sweden
Ethylene
isotonitazepyne
5-nitro-2-(2-{4-[(propan-2-yl)oxy]phenyl}ethyl)-1-[2-
(pyrrolidin-1-yl)ethyl]-1H-1,3-benzimidazole
Opioids
29/09/2025
Estonia
Isotonitazepyne
5-nitro-2-({4-[(propan-2-yl)oxy]phenyl}methyl)-1-[2-
(pyrrolidin-1-yl)ethyl]-1H-1,3-benzimidazole
Opioids
14/03/2025
Germany
Methiodone
4-(ethanesulfonyl)-N,N-dimethyl-4,4-diphenylbutan-2-amine
Opioids
28/05/2025
France
Protodesnitazene
N,N-diethyl-2-{2-[(4-propoxyphenyl)methyl]-1H-1,3benzimidazol-1-yl}ethan-1-amine
Opioids
30/10/2025
Finland
Spirochlorphine
8-[1-(4-chlorophenyl)ethyl]-1-phenyl-1,3,8triazaspiro[4.5]decan-4-one
Opioids
15/04/2025
Sweden
Avizafone
2,6-diamino-N-{2-[(2-benzoyl-4-chlorophenyl)(methyl)amino]-
2-oxoethyl}hexanamide
Others
18/12/2025
Denmark
CL-218,872
3-methyl-6-[3-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl][1,2,4]triazolo[4,3b]pyridazine
Others
26/09/2025
Germany
Clonazafone
2-amino-N-{2-[2-(2-chlorobenzoyl)-4-nitroanilino]-2oxoethyl}acetamide
Others
30/09/2025
Germany
Homomazindol
6-(4-chlorophenyl)-2,3,4,6-tetrahydropyrimido[2,1-a]isoindol6-ol
Others
31/01/2025
Germany
Medetomidine
4-[1-(2,3-dimethylphenyl)ethyl]-1H-imidazole
Others
21/10/2025
Sweden
Mephenaqualone
8-methoxy-3-(2-methylphenyl)-2-phenylquinazolin-4(3H)-one
Others
23/09/2025
Germany
N-propyl ephenidine
N-(1,2-diphenylethyl)propan-1-amine
Others
02-12-2025
Portugal
O-2172
methyl cyclopentyl(3,4-dichlorophenyl)acetate
Others
14/04/2025
Germany
- 17 -

Common name
IUPAC name
EUDA classification Date offormal
notification
Country
2C-EF
2-[4-(2-fluoroethyl)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]ethan-1-amine
Phenethylamines
08-07-2025
Belgium
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-NPS-1. Number of new psychoactive substances reported for the first time to the
EU Early Warning System, by category, 2005–2024
Table EDR26-NPS-2. Number of new psychoactive substances reported each year following their
first detection in the European Union, by category, 2005–2024
Table EDR26-NPS-3a. Seizures of new psychoactive substances in the European Union: total
number and total quantity of material seized, 2005–2024
Table EDR26-NPS-3b. Seizures of new psychoactive substances in the European Union: total
number of material seized, 2005–2024
Table EDR26-NPS-4. Number of opioids reported for the first time to the EU Early Warning
System, 2009–2024
Table EDR26-NPS-5. Seizures of new psychoactive substances in the European Union: quantity
seized, by substance, 2024
Table EDR26-NPS-6. Notifications of new psychoactive substances under the terms of Regulation
(EC) no 1920/2006 (as amended) and Council Framework Decision 2004/757/JHA (as amended) –
2024
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/new-psychoactive-substances_en. Some errors
may have occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the
web page.
- 18 -

Other drugs – the current situation in Europe
(European Drug Report 2026)
Alongside the more well-known substances available on illicit
drug markets, a number of other substances with
hallucinogenic, anaesthetic, dissociative or depressant
properties are used in Europe: these include LSD (lysergic
acid diethylamide), hallucinogenic mushrooms, ketamine and
GHB (gamma-hydroxybutyrate). On this page, you can find
the latest analysis regarding these substances in Europe,
including seizures, prevalence and patterns of use, treatment
entry, harms and more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Signals of harms from uncommonly used
drugs highlight monitoring challenges
Alongside well-known illicit substances available on drug markets, a number of other drugs with
stimulant, hallucinogenic, anaesthetic, dissociative or depressant properties are used in Europe:
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), hallucinogenic mushrooms, ketamine and GHB (gammahydroxybutyrate). Some of these substances are well established in some countries, cities or
among specific populations, but their relative prevalence may remain low in comparison to other
illicit drugs. However, current monitoring approaches often perform poorly in identifying patterns
and trends in the use of these less well-known substances. This makes commenting with
confidence on the prevalence of use and related harms difficult.
Ketamine’s integration into drug markets creates harm
reduction and treatment challenges
Ketamine is consistently available in some national drug markets and may have become a drug of
choice in some settings. It is also consumed in combination with other substances (e.g. alcohol and
stimulants). For example, cocaine was the substance most often reported in combination with
- 1 -

ketamine in acute toxicity presentations to Euro-DEN sentinel hospital in 2024.
Ketamine is commonly snorted and is associated with dose-dependent acute and chronic harms,
such as urological complications, notably bladder damage from intensive use.
Ketamine is also added alongside other stimulants to drug mixtures, such as ‘pink cocaine’ or
‘tucibi’. However, data from drug checking services indicate that combining ketamine with other
drugs is often intentional, with the majority (83%) of ketamine samples tested in 2025 containing
only the intended drug.
The availability of ketamine is underpinned by well-established supply routes. In 2024, ketamine
was seized, mostly as powder, throughout the European Union, but more frequently in Spain and
in larger quantities in Germany, which accounted for more than three quarters of the quantity
reported. A recent EUDA situational assessment confirms that most of the ketamine seized in
Europe originates from licit production in India and is imported in bulk to EU Member States,
mainly Germany, and then diverted to Europe’s illicit market and also exported. Ketamine
production in Europe remains limited, although sites engaged in crystallisation rather than
synthesis are sometimes dismantled. Theft and diversion of ketamine medicines play a minor role
in the illicit market.
Treatment access and referral pathways to specialised care remain a challenge for people with
ketamine-related health problems. The number of clients entering specialised treatment for
problems related to ketamine use remains low. However, it has quadrupled over the last five years,
from 413 cases reported in 2019 to 1 796 in 2024. The majority of these cases are reported by six
countries (Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Italy, Netherlands), likely reflecting higher ketamine
availability in some parts of Europe and limited treatment options elsewhere. People who have
developed urological problems may be poorly represented in drug treatment data. The
Netherlands, which has seen a small but steady increase in ketamine-related urological problems
from 2022 to 2024, established an outpatient hospital clinic specialising in the treatment of
patients experiencing problems resulting from chronic, intensive use of ketamine.
Availability of new benzodiazepines poses public health risks
Non-controlled and new benzodiazepines continue to be available in more than two thirds of
European countries. A total of 40 new benzodiazepines were notified to the EU Early Warning
System between 2007 and 2025 (Figure 8.1), with 28 of these appearing on the drug market in
2024 in 22 EU Member States and Norway (see New psychoactive substances – the current
situation in Europe). Commenting with certainty on the scale of their use is difficult because of
monitoring challenges.
- 2 -

Figure 8.1. Number of formal notifications of benzodiazepines reported to the EU Early
Warning System, 2005-2025
The seemingly legitimate appearance of fake medicines can create a false sense of security among
consumers regarding their use. In some countries, benzodiazepines are widely available on the
illicit market (see Figure 8.2) and continue to be linked to poisoning and overdose outbreaks, which
can escalate rapidly, with vulnerable populations potentially experiencing disproportionate levels
of risk. Ireland, for example, experienced three poisoning and overdose outbreaks in prisons in
2024, including one incident involving a new benzodiazepine, clobromazolam; the other two
involved highly potent nitazene opioids being mis-sold as heroin and benzodiazepines.
Figure 8.2. Illicit benzodiazepine tablets seized in Ireland
Note: Seizure made in October 2024 during Operation Citizen by the Dublin Crime Response Team, Garda Síochána (police), Ireland.
Value of seizure estimated at EUR 1.9 million.
- 3 -

Overdoses from new synthetic opioids can be reversed with naloxone, but those caused by
benzodiazepines require a different antidote that is generally only administered in medical
settings and may require hospitalisation, as was the case in Ireland. Prolonged use of
benzodiazepines can cause dependence and withdrawal symptoms can be life-threatening. Among
people entering treatment in Europe, Ireland reported the highest number (1 711) citing
benzodiazepines as their main problem drug. In Finland and Lithuania, 10% or more of treatment
entrants cited benzodiazepines.
Key data and trends
Prevalence and patterns of use of other drugs
Among young adults (aged 15 to 34), recent national surveys show last year prevalence
estimates for LSD equal to or less than 1%. Exceptions for LSD include Estonia (2.3% in 2023, 1634), France (1.6% in 2023, 18-34), Germany (1.4% in 2024, 18-34), Latvia (1.4% in 2020), Finland
(1.3% in 2022), the Netherlands and Denmark (both 1.1% in 2024 and 2023).
Countries that reported last year prevalence estimates for hallucinogenic mushrooms among
young adults greater than 1% include Czechia (2.7% in 2024), Finland (2.7% in 2022), Estonia
(2.6% in 2023, 16-34), the Netherlands (2.5% in 2024), Norway (2.3% in 2024, 16-34), Ireland
(2.0% in 2023), France (2.0% in 2023, 18-34), Denmark (1.7% in 2023, 16-34) and Germany (1.2%
in 2024, 18-34).
Recent estimates of last year prevalence of ketamine use among young adults (15-34) range
from 0.3% in Romania (2024) to 3.1% in the Netherlands (2024).
The 2024 ESPAD school survey estimated that among 15- to 16-year-old school students in the
European Union, the average lifetime use of LSD and other hallucinogens was 1.8%, ranging
from 0.7% to 6.8%. The average lifetime use for GHB was 1%, ranging from 0.3% to 3.4%.
Among respondents to the 2024 European Web Survey on Drugs, a non-representative survey
of people who use drugs, 18% of those who had used drugs within the last 12 months had used
hallucinogenic mushrooms, 14% reported having used ketamine, 10% LSD or other
hallucinogens and 3% GHB/GBL (gamma-hydroxybutyric acid/gamma-butyrolactone) and
‘tucibi’.
In 2025, compared with other substances, relatively low levels of ketamine residues in municipal
wastewater were reported by 113 cities in 23 EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye (Figure 8.3
). Of the 66 cities in 21 EU Member States with data available for 2024 and 2025, 40 showed an
increase (of at least 10%), 14 were relatively stable and 12 showed a decrease.
- 4 -

Figure 8.3. Ketamine residues in wastewater in selected European cities: changes between
2024 and 2025
Change with respect to previous year: Increase Stable Decrease 
 No previous data
Notes: Mean daily amounts of ketamine in milligrams per 1 000 population. Sampling was carried out over a week between March and
May 2025. Taking into account statistical errors, values that differ by less than 10% from the previous value are considered stable in this
figure.
Source: Sewage Analysis Core Group Europe (SCORE)
For the complete data set and analysis, see Wastewater analysis and drugs – a European multi-city study
Treatment entry for ketamine use
The number of clients entering treatment for ketamine-related problems has increased in
recent years, rising from 413 in 2019 to an estimated 1 796 in 2024.
- 5 -

Harms related to use of other drugs
GHB/GBL was the fifth most common drug reported by the 29 Euro-DEN Plus hospitals across
21 EU Member States and Norway participating in 2024. Overall, it was reported by 17
emergency departments in 12 EU Member States and Norway in 2024. The drug was involved in
an estimated 1% of presentations (median) across the 29 hospitals. The highest proportions of
cases involving GHB/GBL were reported by hospitals in Oslo (49%), Utrecht (32%), Amsterdam
(18%), Barcelona (17%), Ghent (13%) and Ljubljana (12%) (Figure 8.4). Overall, GHB/GBL was
mentioned in 9% of all presentations.
In 2024, ketamine was reported by 18 Euro-DEN Plus hospitals in 13 EU Member States and
Norway and was involved in an estimated 1.3% of presentations (median) across the 29
participating hospitals. Ketamine use was reported in 4% of all presentations.
- 6 -

Figure 8.4. Proportion of acute drug toxicity presentations with mention of GHB/GBL, EuroDEN Plus sentinel hospitals, 2024
Data source: Euro-DEN. For the complete data set and analysis, see European Drug Emergencies Network (Euro-DEN Plus): data and
analysis.
Market data for other drugs
In 2024, almost 4 100 seizures of LSD, amounting to 214 000 units and about 24.36 kilograms,
were reported in Europe (Table 8.1). Eighteen countries reported 1 025 seizures of
hallucinogenic mushrooms, amounting to 42.3 kilograms. Sixteen countries reported 136
seizures of DMT (dimethyltryptamine), amounting to 92.4 kilograms and 2.2 litres.
In 2024, ketamine seizures reported to the EU Early Warning System amounted to 1.6 tonnes of
powders (2.7 tonnes in 2023), with Germany seizing 77% of the total quantity. Seizures of
ketamine have fluctuated at levels above 0.5 tonnes since 2017 (Figure 8.5), while the number of
ketamine seizures has increased by more than 4 times (Figure 8.6).
- 7 -

One ketamine laboratory was dismantled in the European Union in 2024 (6 in 2023). Such sites
have typically been engaged in the crystallisation of bulk ketamine powders.
Drug checking services in 7 EU Member States reported an almost three-fold increase in
samples submitted as ketamine between 2023 and 2025; from 652 to 1 587. The proportion of
samples containing only the expected substance, without adulterants, remained stable, at
approximately 82% (1 306) in 2025 in 8 EU Member States in 10 drug checking services,
compared with 83% (544) in 2023.
Fifteen European countries reported almost 1 500 seizures of GHB or its precursor GBL,
amounting to 34.9 kilograms and 455 litres.
In 2024, EU Member States reported 828 seizures of new benzodiazepines to the EU Early
Warning System, representing approximately 1.4% of the total number of seizures of new
psychoactive substances. Of the 40 new benzodiazepines ever reported to the Early Warning
System, 27 were detected in drug seizures in 22 EU Member States and Norway in 2024.
Table 8.1a. Number of seizures and quantity seized of other drugs, European Union
Drug
Number Quantity
(kg)
Quantity
(litres)
Quantity
(tablets/units/blotters)
2C-B
1860
9
50069
LSD
2253
24.6
0.02
184637
DMT
135
70.8
Hallucinogenic mushrooms 933
39.9
144
GHB
1070
18.2
89.7
51
GBL
167
14.9
178.1
Table 8.1b. Number of seizures and quantity seized of other drugs, European Union, Norway
and Türkiye
Drug
Countries Number Quantity
(kg)
Quantity
(litres)
Quantity
(tablets/units/blotters)
2C-B
12
1860
9
50069
LSD
26
4131
24.6
0.02
214064
DMT
16
136
92.4
2.2
Hallucinogenic mushrooms 18
1025
42.3
144
GHB
15
1313
18.2
167.1
51
GBL
12
185
16.7
288
- 8 -

Figure 8.5. Seizures of ketamine powder in the European Union: total quantity (kilograms),
2006-2024
Figure 8.6. Seizures of ketamine powder in the European Union: total number, 2006-2024
Additional information can be found in the joint EUDA-Europol EU Drug Markets: In-depth analysis
and the EUDA Health and social responses to drug problems: a European guide.
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
- 9 -

Table EDR26-WW-1. Mean weekly measurements by targeted substance from wastewater
analysis in selected European cities in 2025
Table EDR24-Ketamine-1a. Seizures of ketamine powder in the European Union: total number,
2006–2024
Table EDR26-Ketamine-1b. Seizures of ketamine powder in the European Union: total quantity,
2006-2024
Table EDR26-Ketamine-2. Ketamine residues detected in wastewater in selected European cities:
2024
Table EDR26-BZD-1. Number of formal notifications of benzodiazepines reported to the EU Early
Warning System, 2011-25
Table EDR26-Other-8a. Number of seizures and quantity seized of other drugs, European Union,
2024
Table EDR26-Other-8b. Number of seizures and quantity seized of other drugs, European Union,
Norway and Türkiye, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-Other-9. Proportion of all acute drug toxicity presentations related to GHB/GBL
(percent), 2024
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/other-drugs_en. Some errors may have occurred
during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 10 -

Injecting drug use in Europe – the current
situation (European Drug Report 2026)
Despite representing a small share of all drug use in the
European Union, injecting drug use is responsible for a
disproportionate level of both acute and chronic health
harms associated with the consumption of illicit drugs. On
this page, you can find the latest analysis of injecting drug
use in Europe, including key data on prevalence at national
level and among people entering specialised treatment, as
well as insights from studies on syringe residue analysis.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Harms from injecting fuelled by range of
drugs and polysubstance use
Harms and risk environment
Injecting drug use is a high-risk behaviour associated with a range of serious acute and chronic
harms. The health risks from injecting drug use are heightened by the potential for sudden shifts
in the availability of different substances on Europe’s drug markets. Half a million Europeans are
estimated to have injected an illicit drug in the last year, underlining the scale of injecting harms as
a public health priority.
Over the last decade, Europe has seen a gradual downward trend in the proportion of people
entering drug treatment who report injecting their primary drug. However, this assessment is
complicated by changing patterns of use, including increased stimulant use and polysubstance
use, and by the time lag between initiation of drug use and treatment entry.
People who inject drugs are at greater risk of becoming infected by blood-borne viruses, including
HIV, hepatitis B and C viruses, or of dying from a drug overdose. Injecting can also be a cause of
abscesses, septicaemia and nerve damage. Additional long-term risks arise when people inject
substances that are difficult to dissolve and may introduce insoluble particles into the
- 1 -

bloodstream, such as crushed medicine tablets, capsules and crack cocaine. Injection of these
substances is associated with vascular damage, infective endocarditis and other bacterial
infections.
Drug market signals
Historically, heroin has been the main drug associated with injecting in Europe, but other drugs,
including cocaine, amphetamines, synthetic cathinones, opioid agonist medications and various
new psychoactive substances, may also be injected, either alone or in combination. Syringe
residue analysis conducted in cities across Europe shows a diverse range of substances present in
used syringes, including illicit drugs, new psychoactive substances and medicines. Combinations of
substances, including those used as adulterants, are commonly detected. The injection of multiple
substances, for example both stimulants and opioids, can increase health risks, including
overdose, and complicates the delivery of appropriate responses.
New synthetic opioids continue to be integrated into Europe’s illicit drug markets, with syringe
residue analysis from 2024 indicating they are prevalent in some Baltic countries, although the
substances involved vary. Data suggest that nitazenes have become established on the drug
market in some Estonian and Latvian cities, and there are signals of their use in some Lithuanian
cities. Carfentanil continues to be detected in syringes in Latvia and Lithuania, while orphines were
detected in syringes in Riga (Latvia) in 2024. In addition, evidence from Estonia and Latvia appears
to suggest that nitazenes are being adulterated by potent veterinary medicines, such as xylazine.
In other countries, fentanyl and its derivatives are sometimes detected, but at much lower levels.
For example, the detection of fentanyl in Thessaloniki (Greece) in 2024 is concerning given the
fentanyl-related deaths reported in neighbouring Bulgaria the same year. The presence of these
potent opioids in European cities further escalates the risk of overdoses and deaths and raises
preparedness challenges.
Stimulants and other substances
The injection of stimulant drugs, such as cocaine and synthetic cathinones, tends to be associated
with a higher frequency of injecting and at-risk sexual practices, and has been associated with local
HIV outbreaks in the last decade in Europe. Recent syringe residue analysis confirms the presence
of this pattern of use in some European cities. More frequent patterns of injecting may also result
in a higher risk of infection and re-infection with HCV, presenting a potential challenge to the
positive impact of HCV treatment now being reported by some countries (see also Drug-related
infectious diseases – the current situation in Europe). Methamphetamine injecting carries similar
risks; in 2024, the drug continued to be detected at high levels in used syringes in several
European cities. This is a concern, as various signals continue to indicate that stimulant injecting is
increasing among people who inject drugs.
In 2024, the most frequently detected benzodiazepines in analysed used syringes were diazepam,
alprazolam and desmethyldiazepam. Various opioid agonist medications, either diverted or illicitly
- 2 -

manufactured, were also detected.
Public health response and service coverage
Although by international standards, harm reduction interventions, such as the provision of sterile
injecting equipment, are relatively well developed in Europe, coverage and access to this costeffective intervention remain a challenge in some EU Member States. Concern exists around the
low, and in some cases decreasing, levels of provision of sterile syringes reported in Bulgaria,
Cyprus, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia (see also Drug-related infectious diseases – the
current situation in Europe).
Alongside reducing the transmission of blood-borne infectious diseases, reducing overdose deaths
as well as the broader range of health harms associated with injecting drug use are key objectives
of interventions in this area. However, changing patterns of drug injecting, the increasing diversity
of substances used and persistent gaps in the adequacy and coverage of existing responses
continue to pose major challenges for Europe’s frontline responders and policymakers.
Key data and trends
Prevalence of injecting drug use
The number of people who inject drugs is estimated through indirect statistical methods such
as capture-recapture studies and treatment multiplier studies and comes with a high degree of
uncertainty.
The overall prevalence of injecting drug use in the European Union is estimated at 1.8 cases per
1 000 population aged 15 to 64 years (Figure 9.1). This suggests there were an estimated
522 000 people who inject drugs in the European Union in 2024, or 530 000 if Norway is
included.
Injecting drug use estimates range from 0.1 per 1 000 population in the Netherlands to 10 per
1 000 population in Estonia, with particularly high levels also reported in Finland (8.2 per 1 000),
Latvia (6.1 per 1 000), Czechia (6.1 per 1 000) and Lithuania (4.6 per 1 000) (Figure 9.1).
Italy (105 652), France (102 648) and Germany (84 606) reported the highest estimated numbers
of people who inject drugs in the European Union (Figure 9.2).
- 3 -

Figure 9.1. Estimated prevalence of people who inject drugs in the last 12 months (per 1000
population), 2024 or latest data
Note: Based on the latest data available from each country.
- 4 -

Figure 9.2. Estimated number of people who inject drugs in the last 12 months, by country,
2024 or latest data
Note: Two thirds of the national estimates of injecting drug use presented here were derived from indirect statistical methods based on
health registries covering the period 2015 to 2024, while the remainder were derived by applying injection rates from treatment data to
population estimates of people using opioids and stimulants.
Injecting drug use among people entering specialised
treatment
Based on data from 24 countries, among first-time clients entering specialised drug treatment
in 2024 reporting heroin as their primary drug, 19% reported injecting as their main route of
administration (20% in 2023, down from 37% in 2013). Injecting is reported as the main route of
administration by less than 1% of first-time cocaine clients, 1% of first-time amphetamine clients
- 5 -

and 6% of first-time methamphetamine clients (Figure 9.3).
Figure 9.3. Trends in injecting among first-time treatment entrants with heroin, cocaine,
amphetamine or methamphetamine as primary drug: percentage reporting injecting as
main route of administration
Note: Trends in injecting among first-time treatment entrants by substance are based on 24 countries with data for at least 7 of the 8
years (missing values were interpolated from adjacent years).
Syringe residue analysis
ESCAPE – the European Syringe Collection and Analysis Project Enterprise – aims to identify the
range of substances being used by people who inject drugs in a sentinel network of 21 cities in
the European Union and Norway.
The results are based on a sample of syringes and reflect local specificities of the drug markets
and sub-populations of users accessing the participating harm reduction services: they are not
necessarily representative of the national situation.
A total of 3 256 used syringes tested positive for at least one drug category in the participating
cities. A total of 96 substances from 19 drug categories were detected, while an additional 33
substances were classified as adulterants, metabolites or degradation products (Figure 9.4).
- 6 -

Half of the syringes collected contained residues of two or more drug categories, which may
indicate that people who inject drugs often inject more than one substance or that syringes are
reused. The most frequent combination was a mix of a stimulant and an opioid.
- 7 -

Figure 9.4. Percentage of used syringes tested positive by drug category, by city, 2024
- 8 -

- 9 -

- 10 -

Data source: ESCAPE project. For the complete data set and analysis, see ESCAPE: data explorer, analysis and key findings.
Opioids
Heroin was detected in over 50% of analysed syringes in 8 of the participating cities
(Amsterdam, Athens, Barcelona, Cologne, Cork, Dublin, Limerick, Oslo).
Carfentanil – a fentanyl derivative – was commonly found in syringes in Lithuania and Latvia:
Vilnius (93%), Klaipeda (66%) and Riga (16%). Fentanyl was found in syringes in Riga and
Klaipeda, but at lower levels (4% and 2%). Low levels of fentanyl were detected in syringes in
Thessaloniki (2%), Oslo (1%) and Madrid (1%).
Nitazenes were detected in multiple cities. In Tallinn, metonitazene was found in 35% of
syringes and protonitazene in 35%. In Riga, N-desethyletonitazene was found in 23% of
syringes, isotonitazene in 21%, metonitazene in 20% and protonitazepyne in 4%. In Lithuania,
4% of syringes in Klaipeda were positive for protonitazene and 1% for etonitazene.
Orphines, potent synthetic opioids, first detected by ESCAPE in 2024, included spirochlorphine
(7% of syringes in Riga) and cychlorphine (6% in Riga).
- 11 -

Opioid agonist medications detected in syringes included buprenorphine (more than 10% of
syringes in Helsinki, Paris, Patras, Prague, Thessaloniki, Volos) and methadone (more than 10%
of syringes in Barcelona, Cork, Klaipeda, Madrid, Patras, Riga). Morphine was detected in 13% of
syringes in Paris.
Stimulants
Cocaine was detected in over 50% of syringes in 10 cities: Thessaloniki (95%), Barcelona (94%),
Limerick (91%), Split (87%), Dublin (70%), Madrid (69%), Cork (69%), Volos (68%), Cologne (62%)
and Athens (61%).
Amphetamine was commonly detected in Tallinn (69%), Oslo (69%), Riga (52%), Budapest (28%)
and Helsinki (21%).
Methamphetamine detection was highest in Brno (72%), Prague (68%), Riga (38%), Amsterdam
(37%), Tallinn (28%) and Paris (25%).
Synthetic cathinones were most frequently detected in Paris (71%), Budapest (58%), Madrid
(30%), Riga (30%) and Helsinki (23%). A total of 27 distinct cathinones were identified across
participating cities in 2024, with 2-MMC being the most frequently detected.
Other substances
Benzodiazepines were detected in more than 10% of syringes in Athens (54%), Dublin (46%),
Limerick (35%), Volos (29%), Cork, Helsinki (each 21%), Thessaloniki (17%), Patras (13%) and Riga
(10%). Overall, the most commonly detected benzodiazepines were diazepam, alprazolam and
desmethyldiazepam.
Potent tranquillisers were also found in syringe residues. Xylazine, most likely as an adulterant,
was detected in 7% of syringes in Riga in 2024 (previously detected in Riga in 2021-22). In
preliminary 2025 data for Tallinn (Estonia), medetomidine was found in 8% of syringes and
xylazine in 2%.
Ketamine was detected in notable levels in Dublin (15%), Split (13%), Paris (6%), and at low levels
in 6 other cities.
Other substances detected for the first time in 2024 included the antipsychotic drug promazine
(10% in Riga). Also detected for the first time was the synthetic cannabinoid ADB-4en-PINACA,
found in 3% of syringes in Cologne in the presence of heroin. This combination was associated
with poisoning outbreaks during 2023 in France and Lithuania.
Additional information can be found in Drug-related infectious diseases: health and social
responses.
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
- 12 -

The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-INJ-1a. Estimated number and prevalence of people who inject drugs, by country
(latest available data for each country)
Table EDR26-INJ-1b. Estimated prevalence (per 1000 people) of people who inject drugs, (latest
available data for each country)
Table EDR26-INJ-2. Trends in injecting among first-time treatment entrants with heroin, cocaine,
amphetamine or methamphetamine as primary drug: percentage reporting injecting as main
route of administration
Table EDR26-INJ-3a. European Syringe Collection and Analysis Project Enterprise (ESCAPE)
selected data for 2024
Table EDR26-INJ-3b. ESCAPE project site location data
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/injecting-drug-use_en. Some errors may have
occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 13 -

Drug-related infectious diseases – the current
situation in Europe (European Drug Report
2026)
People who inject drugs are at risk of contracting infections
through the sharing of drug use paraphernalia. On this page,
you can find the latest analysis of drug-related infectious
diseases in Europe, including key data on infections with HIV
and hepatitis C, B and A viruses. These infections can cause
acute and chronic diseases that may result in severe healthrelated harms, including death.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Public health risks from drug-related
infectious diseases remain a concern
People who inject drugs are at high risk of becoming infected by hepatitis C, B and A viruses (HCV,
HBV and HAV, respectively) and the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) through the sharing of
drug use paraphernalia. Stimulant use is associated with increased risk of sexually transmitted
infections, while poor living conditions may expose people who use drugs to infections transmitted
through close contact. These infections can lead to acute or chronic diseases that may result in
severe health-related harms, including death.
Potential for HIV outbreaks driven by wider stimulant use and
harm reduction gaps
New HIV notifications are a proxy for the level of transmission. The total number of HIV
notifications in the European Union linked to injecting drug use declined to 822 in 2024 (991 in
2023). However, the notification rate of 1.83 new infections per million population remained higher
than the 2025 UNAIDS target of 0.9 per million, which represents a 75% reduction from the 2010
baseline (Figure 10.1).
- 1 -

Figure 10.1. New HIV notifications linked to injecting drug use in the European Union, 2009
to 2024
Source: ECDC.
Harm reduction approaches are fundamental to reducing HIV transmission among people who
inject drugs. One essential element is the provision of sterile injecting equipment. This is a costeffective intervention that may be delivered through various modalities and in a range of settings,
including prisons and through pharmacies. Nonetheless, levels of needle and syringe provision are
inadequate in relation to estimated needs in several EU Member States, including Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Lithuania, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia (Figure 10.2). In Bulgaria, where harm reduction services
face critical funding challenges, the number of sterile syringes distributed decreased by more than
90% between 2014 and 2024.
- 2 -

Figure 10.2. Number of sterile syringes distributed per person who injects drugs per year,
2024 or latest data
The results from a cross-sectional study conducted in 2024 among 480 people who inject drugs in
Sofia showed that 12.7% tested positive for HIV (via rapid diagnostic tests). This figure is higher
than the 1.7% HIV prevalence reported in the previous seroprevalence study conducted in 2016
across multiple cities in the country, suggesting a possible increase over time. Over the last
decade, Europe has witnessed at least seven documented HIV outbreaks that were attributable to
stimulant injecting. Countries with inadequate needle and syringe exchange provision levels with
respect to the size of their estimated injecting drug use problems remain more exposed to
potential HIV outbreaks. Such outbreaks are costly and can be mitigated through adequate levels
of harm reduction services (Figure 10.3).
- 3 -

Figure 10.3. Most-recent documented HIV outbreaks in EUDA Member States among people
who inject drugs: locations and associated injected substances, 2014 to 2024
While people who inject drugs are at much higher risk of HIV transmission when sharing injecting
material, non-injecting stimulant use also exposes people to HIV and other infections through risky
and unprotected sexual intercourse, requiring appropriate prevention measures (access to
condoms and pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis). The availability of stimulants continues to
increase in Europe, creating a more diverse risk group. The European Union’s experience has
shown that higher levels of integrated prevention and harm reduction service provision are
required to prevent and contain HIV transmission related to stimulant use. Service funding and
access barriers remain a key challenge for policymakers and frontline staff.
Late HIV diagnosis remains a cause of preventable illnesses and
deaths
Ensuring the linkage of people who use drugs and who are HIV-positive to treatment remains a
challenge within the European Union. In 2024, more than half (52%) of newly notified HIV
infections attributable to injecting drug use were diagnosed late, which suggests that more and
targeted testing would allow earlier treatment and stop transmission. In the same year, EU
Member States reported 118 AIDS notifications linked to injecting drug use (0.3 per million
- 4 -

population), indicating either late HIV diagnosis, poor treatment access or low adherence for some
patients, factors that contribute to preventable illness and death.
Integrating prevention, testing and treatment to reduce
chronic HCV infections
In Europe, people who inject drugs also have a high burden of chronic viral hepatitis, and injecting
drug use remains the most common risk factor for new HCV diagnoses. Although there is no
vaccine for HCV, unlike HBV and HAV, effective treatments exist. It was estimated that, in 2019, at
least 36% of the 1.8 million chronic HCV infections in the EU Member States and Norway were
associated with injecting drug use. There is also evidence that harm reduction services, such as
needle and syringe programmes, as well as the provision of opioid agonist treatment, can reduce
the risk of HCV transmission (see Harm reduction – the current situation in Europe). It is important
to identify individuals who remain chronically infected with the virus, as they are at risk of cirrhosis
and cancer. Also, they can transmit the virus to others through the sharing of any injecting
paraphernalia that has been in contact with their blood. However, in many countries, people who
use drugs face barriers to HCV testing and treatment at the system, service provider and client
levels, resulting in many HCV infections not being diagnosed or treated.
Time trends in the prevalence of viraemic or active HCV infection among people who inject drugs
are useful for monitoring the impact of prevention and treatment. The EUDA monitors progress
through its viral hepatitis elimination barometer. Among the countries reporting to the EUDA,
Spain, Sweden and Norway have evidence of significant reductions in viraemic HCV prevalence
over time, as measured by HCV-RNA in city-level seroprevalence studies among people who inject
drugs and use harm reduction services (Figure 10.4). Cities in these countries achieved reductions
in viraemic HCV prevalence of more than 50% during the past decade, with Oslo reaching the 80%
reduction target set by the WHO for 2030. These encouraging trends are reported from cities
where a decentralised and integrated approach to prevention, testing and treatment has been
implemented for the key population of people who use drugs. Different aspects of this approach,
endorsed in the joint EUDA-ECDC guidelines, are present across the cities. For example, Madrid
provides increased access to harm reduction for outreach service clients and offers free testing
and personalised referrals to care when a hospital visit is required. In Stockholm, testing and
treatment offers are, as much as possible, made in the same location. Overall, while the
decentralised approach requires sufficient financial resources, it is considered cost-effective, as it
can save lives and reduce the burden on other resources in the long term.
- 5 -

Figure 10.4. Trends in HCV-RNA prevalence (%) among people who inject drugs: results from
seroprevalence studies, 2015-2024
Enhanced access to HBV and HAV vaccination needed for people
who use drugs
Surveillance data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) reveal that
15% of the 567 acute HBV cases notified in 2023 were attributable to injecting drug use. People
with chronic HBV infection are at risk of long-term complications, including liver cirrhosis and
cancer. As part of Europe’s Beating Cancer Plan , the European Union has committed to improving
HBV vaccination coverage across the population, including better access for groups with low
uptake. Systematically offering HBV (and HAV) vaccination in prison settings is supported by the
joint ECDC-EUDA toolkit, which highlights the sharing of injecting material as a risk factor for HBV
infection.
In 2025, a large HAV outbreak with person-to-person transmission affected Czechia, Hungary,
Slovakia and Austria. Czechia and Austria observed a significant number of infections among
people experiencing homelessness and people who use drugs. In Czechia, 27 deaths were linked
to the virus. Most of these fatalities were among people aged 55 to 74, many of whom were using
drugs or alcohol and experiencing homelessness. Promoting HAV vaccination through routine or
one-off vaccination services delivered through outreach activities can benefit people who use
drugs and have difficulty accessing and attending healthcare services.
- 6 -

Key data and trends
HIV/AIDS
In 2024, the number of new HIV notifications linked to injecting drug use in the European Union
decreased to 822 (1.83 per million population), compared with 991 the previous year.
HIV notification rates attributable to injecting drug use exceeded 5 per million population in
Bulgaria, Greece, Latvia and Lithuania.
New HIV cases related to injecting drug use accounted for 4.7% of all new notifications with a
known route of transmission in 2024. In the same year, HIV cases related to injecting drug use
accounted for more than 10% of new notifications in Greece (24%), Latvia (15%), Lithuania (15%),
Bulgaria (13%), Austria (11%), Norway (11%) and Germany (10%).
HCV and HBV
Recent estimates of viraemic or active HCV infection (as measured by HCV-RNA) among people
who inject drugs and access harm reduction services are available from six European countries,
although only at subnational level. The prevalence of HCV-RNA derived from seroprevalence
studies ranged from 5.8% in Oslo (2024) to 56% in Tallinn (2022). Intermediate levels were
observed in Madrid (20% in 2022), Budapest (24% in 2021), Bavaria (27% in 2022) and Stockholm
(30% in 2021).
Estimates for HBV infection (as measured by the presence of the hepatitis B surface antigen),
derived from the latest seroprevalence studies among people who inject drugs, were highest in
Hungary (5.8% in 2021), Latvia (5.6% in 2022) and Romania (5.6% in 2023).
HAV
In 2025, more than 6 500 cases of HAV were reported to ECDC: Czechia (2 310), Slovakia (2 482),
Hungary (1 548) and Austria (216).
The primary populations affected by the outbreak varied nationally. Austria and Czechia
observed a significant number of cases among people experiencing homelessness and people
who use drugs. Injecting drug use was linked to 25% of cases in Austria and 8% of cases in
Czechia.
Where data are available, between 41% (Slovakia) and 80% (Czechia) of cases required
hospitalisation. In total, 39 deaths related to the HAV outbreak were reported in 2025.
Additional detailed information can be found in the EUDA’s Drug-related infectious diseases:
health and social responses.
- 7 -

The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-DRID-1. New HIV notifications linked to injecting drug use in the European Union,
2009 to 2024
Table EDR26-DRID-2. Most-recent HIV outbreaks in Europe among people who inject drugs and
the associated injected substance, 2014 to 2024
Table EDR26-DRID-3. Number of sterile syringes distributed per person who inject drugs per
year, 2024 or latest data
Table EDR26-DRID-5a. New HIV cases attributable to injecting drug use, 2024 or most recent
year
Table EDR26-DRID-5b. New AIDS cases attributable to injecting drug use, 2024 or most recent
year
Table EDR26-DRID-5c. Trends in drug-related HIV: EU and selected countries (cases per million
population)
Table EDR26-DRID-5d. Countries with national data on HCV and HBV, 2024
Table EDR26-DRID-6. Prevalence of active HCV infection among people who inject drugs, by
country, 2024 or latest available data
Table EDR26-DRID-7. Trends in HCV-RNA prevalence (%) among people who inject drugs: results
from seroprevalence studies, 2013-2024
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/drug-related-infectious-diseases_en. Some errors
may have occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the
web page.
- 8 -

Drug-induced deaths – the current situation in
Europe (European Drug Report 2026)
Estimating the mortality attributable to drug use is critical for
understanding the public health impact of drug use and how
this may be changing over time. On this page, you can find
the latest analysis of drug-induced deaths in Europe,
including key data on overdose deaths, substances
implicated and more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Enhanced understanding of drug-related
mortality trends will improve responses to
overdoses
Estimating the mortality attributable to drug use is critical for understanding the changing public
health impact of drug use. Understanding the factors driving trends is key for developing effective
policies and responses. A key component is drug-induced deaths, defined as deaths directly
attributable to drug use and often referred to as drug overdose deaths. However, this measure
captures only a share of the overall mortality associated with drug use, as it excludes deaths from
accidents, violence, suicides by means other than drug poisoning or chronic disease, where drug
use may also have played a role.
An assessment of drug-induced deaths remains a key measure for understanding drug-related
harms, albeit challenging to interpret due to methodological and data availability issues. Data for
the most recent reporting year (2024) are available for only 22 of the 29 countries, and estimated
values are calculated to derive an overall EU estimate. Improving the timeliness and completeness
of data will help develop better responses to overdoses at a time when Europe’s drug problems
are increasingly diverse and new drug threats can rapidly emerge, straining existing response
models.
Several important caveats frame the available data. Because of methodological limitations, the
numbers of drug-induced deaths represent minimum estimates. Moreover, as reporting capacity
- 1 -

varies between countries, national comparisons must be made cautiously. The scarcity of detailed
toxicological information in some countries limits our overall understanding of the role played by
different drugs and polysubstance use in driving rates of drug-induced deaths over time. Most
fatal overdoses involve the use of more than one substance, and drug consumption patterns,
including polysubstance use, are increasingly complex. 
Drug-induced mortality is driven by polysubstance use and
diverse opioids
The provisional overall estimate for the European Union of almost 7 600 drug-induced deaths in
2024 is stable compared to the revised 2023 estimate, although it represents an increase of 6.5%
on the consolidated 2022 estimate. The largest annual increases in the number of drug-induced
deaths in 2024 were reported by Bulgaria, Germany, the Netherlands and Türkiye.
Opioids, usually in combination with other substances, remain the group of substances most
implicated in drug-induced deaths. Heroin was involved in an estimated 1 600 deaths in the
European Union in 2024 and was commonly identified in opioid-related deaths in some western
European countries. However, in 2024, it was present in the majority of overdose deaths only in
Luxembourg and Austria (heroin and morphine are not reported separately in Austria). Opioids
other than heroin, including methadone, buprenorphine, highly potent synthetic opioids and painrelief medicines containing opioids, are detected in a substantial share of overdose deaths in some
countries (Figure 11.1).
- 2 -

Figure 11.1 Opioids mentioned in drug-induced deaths reported in special mortality
registers, by substance, 2024
- 3 -

Note: Data from special mortality registers. Countries with at least 70 cases reported are included. Countries are sorted in descending
order by the proportion of cases involving heroin. In some countries, the details on the exact opioids involved are missing. In Austria, no
distinction is available between heroin and morphine.
Where detailed toxicological information is available on drug associations, it usually shows the
presence of multiple substances, indicating that polysubstance toxicity is the norm.
In all countries, most drug-induced deaths are among males (Figure 11.2). The data are indicative
of an ageing opioid-using cohort in Europe, with the number of drug-induced deaths among 50- to
64-year-olds having doubled between 2014 and 2024 (Figure 11.3 below).
- 4 -

The available data also suggest that deaths where stimulants are implicated are rising in some
countries (see also Cocaine – the current situation in Europe and Synthetic stimulants – the current
situation in Europe). Data from 20 countries suggest that one quarter of the drug-induced deaths
reported in 2024 involved cocaine. It should be noted that stimulant deaths may be underreported and their role may be underappreciated, as other drugs, including opioids, are often
detected in deaths where stimulants are implicated.
Figure 11.2. Proportion of males among drug-induced deaths in the European Union, Norway
and Türkiye in 2024, or most recent year (percent)
Europe’s changing synthetic opioid market creates potential for
overdose outbreaks and deaths
Highly potent synthetic opioids such as the nitazenes have been associated with outbreaks of fatal
and non-fatal poisonings in Europe. However, except in some Baltic countries, these drugs are not
prominent in the routine data at EU level. Nonetheless, sudden drug market shifts can lead to the
rapid emergence of other highly potent synthetic opioids, such as orphines (see also New
- 5 -

psychoactive substances – the current situation in Europe), while limitations in toxicological
detection can delay identification, making it harder to assess and respond to the threat. To support
consistent testing and reporting in Europe, in 2025, the EUDA laboratories network launched an
analytical reference standards toolkit containing 14 samples of nitazenes and orphines.
In addition to the key role played in Estonia and Latvia, nitazene opioids were involved in localised
poisoning outbreaks in Ireland in 2023 and 2024 and in France in 2023. Deaths and acute toxicity
linked to nitazenes have been reported in 2024 in Germany (9), as well as in Sweden (31) and
Norway (21). Since 2019, at least 21 EU Member States have reported the presence of one or more
nitazenes. Because nitazenes degrade in post-mortem blood samples, deaths involving these
substances are likely to be underestimated.
Over the period 2024-2025, fentanyl has been associated with over 100 drug-induced deaths in
Bulgaria. Fentanyl-related deaths and hospitalisations, initially reported mainly in Sofia, were
observed in other Bulgarian cities in 2025. In the context of limited harm reduction service
provision, including the absence of take-home naloxone programmes, the diffusion of highly
potent synthetic opioids in Bulgaria is particularly concerning.
Some EU Member States have responded to the presence of highly potent synthetic opioids on
their drug markets by strengthening existing harm reduction and treatment responses. Measures
taken include the development of overdose warning systems, rapid alert media warnings, national
warnings, increasing access to naloxone, prioritising nitazenes in narcotics classification and
increasing police efforts targeting online sellers.
Preventing self-harm from poisonings requires targeted
interventions
Many overdose deaths are reported as accidental, and for others the intent is undetermined.
Where information on intentionality is available, a relatively high proportion of reported overdose
deaths (1 in 7 overall in 2024) were classified as intentional, that is, with a suicidal intent. Current
data reveal a higher proportion of overdose deaths with a suicidal intent among women than men.
Addressing overdose deaths with a suicidal intent requires targeted interventions, including
tailored mental-health and suicide-prevention services for people experiencing drug problems and
co-occurring mental health conditions.
Improved access to services and integrated care can help
reduce overdoses and deaths
Responses aimed at reducing opioid-related deaths include interventions to reduce vulnerability,
prevent overdoses and prevent death when overdoses occur (see also Harm reduction – the
current situation in Europe). These interventions are challenged, however, by changes over time in
the population and characteristics of people consuming opioids, their patterns of use, the social
context of their drug taking and the substances consumed. Enrolment in opioid agonist treatment
- 6 -

is strongly evidenced as a protective factor against opioid overdose and some other causes of
death. However, in many EU Member States, treatment coverage and access remain below the
levels recommended by the World Health Organization.
Growing evidence suggests that increasing the availability of opioid antagonists can help prevent
fatal opioid overdoses. While all countries provide naloxone in clinical settings, by 2025, take-home
naloxone programmes were also reported in 19 European countries, although availability varies
between and within countries. In addition, drug consumption rooms, also designed to reduce
overdose deaths, were operational in 12 EU Member States and Norway in 2025 (see also Harm
reduction – the current situation in Europe and Health and social responses: drug consumption
rooms). However, the presence of highly potent synthetic opioids, such as nitazenes, can
complicate overdose reversal and challenge the effectiveness of these interventions. When offered
within drug consumption rooms, drug checking can reach more vulnerable groups and may help
reduce overdose risk linked to unexpected or potent opioids and polysubstance use.
Drug-induced deaths represent only a portion of the overall mortality associated with drug use.
Opioid dependence is typically a chronic condition, characterised by multiple episodes of
treatment and relapse. People consuming opioids over many years are likely to have accumulated
other health problems related to their substance use, which often includes alcohol and tobacco
consumption, and the cumulative effects of economic and social marginalisation on their general
health. Among these are infectious diseases (e.g. HIV, HCV infections), liver damage, cancer and
mental health conditions. Improving access to general healthcare through multidisciplinary care
and integrated pathways is key both to helping people with opioid problems manage illness and to
reducing preventable mortality.
Key data and trends
Mortality rates due to overdose
The mortality rate due to overdose in the European Union in 2024 is estimated at 25 deaths per
million population aged 15 to 64.
Mortality rates rate due to overdose were highest among people aged 40-44, for both females
and males (Figure 11.3).
Overdose deaths
A minimum estimate of 7 589 fatal overdoses involving drugs occurred in the European Union in
2024 (7 653 in 2023; see Figure 11.4 below).
The number of overdose deaths reported in the European Union among those aged 50 to 64 is
estimated to have more than doubled between 2014 and 2024 overall, increasing by 99%
- 7 -

among women (from 169 to 337 deaths) and by 132% among men (from 458 to 1 063 deaths).
In the same period, the number of overdose deaths among teenagers (aged 15 to 19 years) has
almost tripled among young females (from 14 to 44 deaths) and almost doubled among young
males (from 49 to 82) (Figure 11.3).
Figure 11.3. Number and rates per million population of drug-induced deaths reported in the
European Union in 2014 and 2024, or the most recent year, by sex and age band
Established and new substances associated with drug-induced
deaths
Opioids, including heroin and its metabolites, often in combination with other substances, were
estimated to be present in around 7 out of 10 fatal overdoses in the European Union in 2024 (
Figure 11.4 and Figure 11.5).
Heroin continues to be involved in large numbers of deaths in some European countries, with
over 698 cases in Germany, 121 in Austria (heroin or morphine) and 63 in Sweden. Based on
provisional data, heroin was estimated to be involved in at least 1 600 deaths in 2024 in the
European Union (1 700 in 2023). Data from the 20 EU Member States providing data for 2024
may indicate a downward trend in heroin-related deaths, declining from around 1 300 in 2022
to 1 200 in 2023 and 1 100 in 2024.
- 8 -

Among the 20 EU Member States providing data for 2023 and 2024, cocaine, mostly in the
presence of opioids, was involved in 1 133 overdose deaths (27%) in 2024, and in 1 053 deaths
(26%) in 2023. In 2024, cocaine was involved in the majority of overdose deaths in Spain, Cyprus,
Luxembourg, Malta and Portugal.
Of the 21 countries with post-mortem data available for 2024, 20 reported deaths where noncocaine stimulants (e.g. amphetamines) were involved. Other stimulant-related deaths, such as
those associated with cardiovascular problems, may go undetected.
In 2024, synthetic cathinones were reported in 38 drug-induced deaths in 7 countries, with
Finland accounting for 19.
In 8 of the 21 countries with post-mortem toxicological data available for 2024, at least 1 in 4
drug-induced deaths involved methadone. There is no information on whether methadone was
prescribed, misused or illicitly produced, and its presence in toxicology findings does not imply
that it caused the poisoning, as overdoses often involve multiple substances.
Available data from 15 EU Member States indicate that the number of deaths related to fentanyl
and fentanyl derivatives increased significantly, with the drugs being linked to 208 overdose
deaths in 2024 (129 in 2023). Germany reported the largest number of fentanyl-related deaths
(95). Some of these fatalities might be associated with diverted fentanyl medicines rather than
illicitly produced fentanyl.
Nitazene opioids were linked to drug-induced deaths in 2024 in Estonia (43 out of 97 deaths)
and Latvia (36 out of 77 deaths).
Between June 2024 and January 2026, 5 EU Member States reported 5 cases of acute non-fatal
poisoning and 18 deaths with confirmed exposure to orphines, mostly cychlorphine (See also
New psychoactive substances in Europe – the current situation in Europe).
In countries with data available for 2024, oxycodone was reported as being involved in 248
drug-induced deaths in 9 countries.
In 2024, benzodiazepines, together with other substances, primarily opioids, were detected in
most overdose deaths in Denmark, Estonia, Luxembourg, Austria, Slovenia and Finland;
pregabalin was involved in at least a quarter of the cases in Denmark, Austria and Finland.
Deaths linked to synthetic cannabinoids more than tripled from 61 cases in 2023 to 202 in 2024
in Türkiye (up from 8 in 2022). Preliminary data suggest a further increase in 2025.
- 9 -

Figure 11.4a. Drug-induced deaths in the European Union
Note: EU+2 refers to EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye.
- 10 -

Figure 11.4b. Drug-induced deaths in the European Union: age at death, 2024 or most recent
available data (percent)
- 11 -

Figure 11.4c. Trends in drug-induced deaths in the European Union, Norway and Türkiye
Note: Comparable data for Germany are not available before 2021. For trend visualisation, earlier years were populated using the first
available data point. However, according to the national definition used at the time, drug-induced deaths in Germany increased up to
2020. Data are not available for some countries for 2023 or 2024. In those cases, the most recent available data were used in place of
the missing values (2022 for Belgium, Ireland, Greece; 2023 for Spain, France, Poland, Portugal).
- 12 -

Figure 11.4d. Age distribution (percent) of drug-induced deaths reported in the European
Union, Norway and Türkiye in 2024 or the most recent year
- 13 -

Figure 11.5. Proportion of drug-induced deaths with opioids mentioned, 2024 or most recent
available data
Overall mortality
An Austrian national cohort study followed 26 000 individuals who had ever been prescribed
opioid agonist treatment for almost 20 years and recorded approximately 2 400 deaths. Allcause mortality among cohort members was more than 7 times that of the Austrian general
population, with greater excess among women (12-fold) than men (7-fold). Age-specific analyses
showed that by the age of early to mid-40s, deaths from non-communicable diseases
collectively exceeded those from drug-related causes.
Additional detailed information can be found in the EUDA’s Opioid-related deaths: health and
social responses and Frequently asked questions (FAQ): drug-induced deaths in Europe.
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
- 14 -

A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-DRD-1. Characteristics of drug-induced deaths: numbers, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-DRD-1. Characteristics of drug-induced deaths: numbers, 2024 or most recent year
Table EDR26-DRD-1a. Characteristics of drug-induced deaths: gender (percent), 2024 or most
recent year
Table EDR26-DRD-1b. Characteristics of drug-induced deaths: age (by gender), 2024 or most
recent year
Table EDR26-DRD-2. Age distribution of drug-induced deaths reported in the European Union,
Norway and Türkiye in 2024 or the most recent year
Table EDR26-DRD-3. Proportion of males among drug-induced deaths in the European Union,
Norway and Türkiye in 2024, or most recent year (percent)
Table EDR24-DRD-4. Drug-induced deaths in the European Union: age at death, 2024 or most
recent available data (percent)
Table EDR26-DRD-7. Proportion of drug-induced deaths cases with opioids mentioned, 2024 or
most recent available data
EDR26-DRD-5 Number of drug-induced deaths reported in the European Union in 2014 and
2024, or the most recent year, by age band
Table EDR24-DRD-6. Trends in drug-induced deaths in the European Union, Norway and Türkiye
Table EDR26-DRD-10. Opioids mentioned in drug-induced deaths, by substance
Table EDR26-DRD-11. Number and rates per million population of drug-induced deaths
reported in the European Union in 2014 and 2024, or the most recent year, by sex and age band
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/drug-induced-deaths_en. Some errors may have
occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 15 -

Opioid agonist treatment – the current
situation in Europe (European Drug Report
2026)
People who use opioids represent nearly one third of the
clients in specialist drug treatment. Opioid agonist treatment
is the main form of treatment for opioid-related problems in
these cases. On this page, you can find the latest analysis of
the provision of opioid agonist treatment in Europe,
including key data on coverage, the number of people in
treatment, pathways to treatment and more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
As Europe’s drug problem changes, improved
access to opioid agonist treatment is needed
Opioid agonist treatment
Opioid agonist treatment is a well-established intervention for opioid dependence. It is
recommended, in both community and prison settings, to prevent transmission of HIV and HCV
and to help reduce injecting risk behaviour and injecting frequency. In addition, enrolment in
opioid agonist treatment is strongly evidenced as a protective factor against opioid overdose and
some other causes of death (see also Injecting drug use – the current situation in Europe and
Drug-related infectious diseases – the current situation in Europe).
The long-term nature of opioid use disorders means that opioid agonist treatment accounts for a
major share of the resources invested in drug treatment services in many countries. In 2024, an
estimated 505 000 people in the European Union received some form of opioid agonist treatment
for opioid-related problems. This represents nearly one third of the estimated 1.76 million people
who received treatment for problems related to the use of illicit drugs during the same period.
European countries differ in the settings, forms and extent to which opioid agonist treatment is
available. Opioid agonist treatment is primarily provided in outpatient settings. These can include
- 1 -

specialist drug treatment centres, low-threshold agencies and primary healthcare centres, which
can include general practitioners’ surgeries. More flexible outpatient treatment options are also
available in some countries, as are new treatment modes, such as extended-release formulations
of buprenorphine, which allow clients to have sustained opioid agonist treatment with a single
monthly injection or a subcutaneous implant. Emerging evidence indicates that this modality may
be effective in reducing opioid and polysubstance use, preventing diversion of opioid agonist
medicines in prison settings, help alleviate pressure on prescribers by reducing the number of
visits each client requires, and may also support the extension of coverage to rural or remote
areas.
Coverage, availability and emerging threats
In terms of treatment availability, a mixed picture emerges across EU Member States, with some
reporting increases in access to opioid agonist treatment and others reporting declines. However,
limited availability of data continues to hinder rigorous analysis of provision and capacity at the EU
level. Nonetheless, the available information shows that opioid agonist treatment provision
remains insufficient and below the minimum levels recommended by the WHO in some EU
Member States that report a high prevalence of high-risk opioid use (see Key data and trends).
Some of these countries have observed the use of potent new synthetic opioids and high rates of
drug overdoses (see Drug-induced deaths – the current situation in Europe). The EUDA carried out
a threat assessment of the increased availability, use and harms of highly potent synthetic opioids
in the Baltic region in 2025. It found that treatment access was hindered by stigma, administrative
restrictions and poor adaptation of opioid agonist treatment to the needs of those who use
synthetic opioids. The assessment identified the need to expand access and geographic coverage
for opioid agonist treatment.
Polysubstance use and the availability of potent new synthetic opioids on local drug markets can
increase the risks from opioid use. Recent syringe residue analysis data from the ESCAPE network
reveal that, alongside heroin, a range of highly potent new synthetic opioids, including fentanyl,
carfentanil, nitazenes and orphines are being injected in some cities. In countries and cities where
these new synthetic opioids may be continuously available, more research is needed to determine
if adaptations are needed to ensure that current levels of opioid agonist treatment provision
remain optimal. There is also a need for further research, especially for randomised controlled
trials, to establish the utility and effectiveness of new treatment modalities and pharmaceutical
preparations.
Evolving service needs and challenges
Because opioid dependence is a long-term, relapsing condition, people often undergo multiple
episodes of treatment and may require a combination of responses for care to be effective. In
addition, many people with opioid dependence experience co-occurring mental and physical
health issues and social problems, which creates further service needs and underscores the
importance of integrated care delivery.
- 2 -

The long-term nature of opioid problems is underlined by the data available on the characteristics
of those receiving opioid agonist treatment. The data also indicate that Europe’s cohort of people
with heroin-related problems is ageing, with more than 70% of clients in opioid agonist treatment
now aged 40 or older, while 5% are under 30 years old. A lag of 14 years exists between the
average age of first use at 24 and first treatment episode at 38. This has service delivery and cost
implications, with providers now addressing more complex healthcare needs in increasingly
vulnerable and marginalised clients. There is a need to ensure the existence of effective referral
pathways to generic services offering treatment for other conditions associated with the ageing
process, including geriatric care, due to the long-term effects of illicit drug use, but also tobacco
and alcohol use. Other complex problems among these clients include mental health issues, social
isolation, employment and housing. The development of integrated, multidisciplinary and agespecialised care services for this group remains a key policy and provision consideration. 
Another challenge for treatment provision is that, in some countries, younger people with opioid
problems have limited access to opioid agonist treatment. Barriers to service access may include
regulatory restrictions and stigma associated with the potentially long-term nature of treatment.
This issue is particularly relevant in the context of polysubstance use and the presence of new
synthetic opioids in Europe. There is also concern about the potential emergence of a more
diverse group of people at risk of opioid dependence and related harms, driven by the increased
availability of opioid-containing tablets on some local drug markets. For example, Denmark
launched an inter-ministerial action plan, Youth Without Opioids, in 2024 to address increased
opioid-containing tablet consumption among young people. The plan included measures across
multiple policy areas, such as increased prevention initiatives, closer surveillance and
strengthened customs control, further training for doctors in opioid agonist and withdrawal
treatment, along with efforts to enhance access to treatment.
More information on health and social responses to opioid use, including among older people, can
be found in the EUDA’s Health and social responses to drug problems: a European guide.
Key data and trends
Number of people in opioid agonist treatment
Overall, opioid agonist treatment was received by about 60% of the estimated 855 000 high-risk
opioid users in the European Union in 2024, an estimated 505 000 (517 000 including Norway
and Türkiye) (Figure 12.1). Incomplete availability of data continues to limit our ability to
estimate the number of high-risk opioid users and the proportion receiving opioid agonist
treatment and to conduct trend analysis.
The number of people receiving opioid agonist treatment increased in 10 EU Member States
between 2019 and 2024, including in Finland (by 114%), Poland (42%), Denmark (18%) and
Estonia (10%).
- 3 -

Levels of provision remain low and inadequate in some countries estimated to have significant
numbers of high-risk opioid users, such as Latvia and Lithuania (Figure 12.2), and are
decreasing in Bulgaria and Romania.
- 4 -

Figure 12.1. Clients in opioid agonist treatment
Note: Data for age distribution are based on 13 countries representing 41% (209 000) of all registered clients in the European Union.
Data for gender are based on 18 countries representing 28% (141 000) of all registered clients. Data for treatment duration are based
on 6 countries representing 5% of all registered clients (26 000).
Distribution of opioid agonist treatment clients by type of medication: SROM is slow-release oral morphine and DHC is dihydrocodeine.
- 5 -

Figure 12.2. Coverage of opioid agonist treatment (percent) in 2024 or the most recent year
Note: Coverage is defined as the share of people who use opioids receiving the intervention. Data are displayed as point estimates and
uncertainty intervals.
Pathways to treatment
Self-referral continues to be the most common route into specialist drug treatment for opioid
clients. This form of referral, which also includes referral by family members or friends,
accounted for about two thirds (65%) of those with primary opioid problems entering specialist
drug treatment in Europe in 2024. Almost a quarter (24%) of clients were referred by health,
education and social services, including other drug treatment centres, while 7% were referred
by the criminal justice system.
Opioid agonist medications
The provision of more than one opioid agonist treatment medication in 2024 is reported by 25
countries. Methadone is the most commonly prescribed medication, received by more than half
(61%) of opioid agonist treatment clients across Europe. Another 36% are treated with
medications based on buprenorphine, which is the principal medication reported to be used in
9 countries. Other substances, including slow-release morphine or diacetylmorphine (heroin),
are more rarely prescribed, being together received by 3% of opioid agonist clients in Europe.
Three countries reported clients receiving heroin-assisted treatment in 2024.
Six countries report the use of newer buprenorphine preparations: a prolonged-release solution
for injection and a subcutaneous implant.
- 6 -

The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-OAT-1. Coverage of opioid agonist treatment in 2024 or the most recent year and
2013/14 (Percent)
Table EDR26-OAT-2. Clients in opioid agonist treatment
Table EDR26-OAT-3 Number of European countries implementing opioid agonist treatment, up
to 2025
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/opioid-agonist-treatment_en. Some errors may
have occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web
page.
- 7 -

Harm reduction – the current situation in
Europe (European Drug Report 2026)
Harm reduction encompasses policies, programmes and
interventions for reducing the health, social, legal and
economic impacts of drug use on individuals, communities
and societies. On this page, you can find the latest analysis of
harm reduction interventions in Europe, including key data
on opioid agonist treatment, take-home naloxone
programmes, drug consumption rooms and more.
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
Harm reduction is adapting to new and
evolving drug problems
Illicit drug use contributes to the global burden of disease. Interventions to reduce this burden
include prevention, which aims to delay or reduce drug use and its harms, and treatment to
support stabilisation and recovery for people with drug-related problems. Harm reduction
complements these approaches by working non-judgmentally with people who use drugs to
reduce risks linked to their drug use behaviour and unsafe consumption conditions, and to
promote health and well-being. A well-documented example is the provision of sterile injecting
equipment to reduce the risk of infectious disease transmission. Measures such as this appear to
have contributed to the low rate, by international standards, of new HIV infections associated with
injecting drug use in Europe. Nonetheless, gaps in service provision and the growing use of
stimulants present challenges for the European Union in meeting the WHO continuum-of-care
targets among people living with HIV (see Drug-related infectious diseases – the current situation
in Europe). In the last decade, evolving drug use patterns and changing user profiles have required
harm reduction to address a wider range of risks. Harm reduction has expanded to include
preventing overdoses linked to polysubstance use, responding to stimulant smoking and
supporting vulnerable people facing complex health and social problems.
- 1 -

A spectrum of interventions is needed to tackle changing drugrelated harms
Illicit drug use can cause chronic and acute health problems, potentially compounded by the
properties of the substances, adulterants, route of administration, individual vulnerability and the
social context of use. Chronic harms include dependence and infectious diseases, while the range
of acute harms includes drug poisonings and overdoses. Although uncommon at the population
level, opioid use accounts for much drug-related morbidity and mortality. Risks are higher with
injecting and polysubstance use, making people who use opioids and inject drugs long-standing
priorities for harm reduction interventions, with well-developed and evaluated service models.
Many harm reduction services, such as opioid agonist treatment and needle and syringe
programmes are integrated into mainstream healthcare in Europe. Updated EUDA-ECDC guidance
recommends combining opioid agonist treatment with the provision of sterile injecting equipment
in community and prison settings to prevent the spread of HIV and hepatitis C, reduce injecting
risk and maximise the coverage and effectiveness of these interventions among people who inject
opioids.
Harm reduction equipment is usually delivered through integrated low-threshold services, which
distribute sterile materials to reduce harms associated with continued drug use. The equipment
provided may include items used for drug preparation and administration (e.g. filters, cookers,
water, needles and syringes, pipes, foil) and items to prevent or respond to harms (wound care
kits, naloxone) (Figure 13.1). Current evidence indicates the effectiveness of needle and syringe
programmes and take-home naloxone, but evaluation data on other items remain limited,
although observational studies suggest such provision can help broaden engagement with people
who use drugs, including facilitating their access to treatment and social reintegration measures (
Health and social responses: provision of harm reduction equipment for high-risk drug use).
- 2 -

Figure 13.1 Common sterile harm reduction supplies for high-risk drug use
Notes: Supplies for which there is evidence of benefit and where we can have a high or reasonable confidence in the available evidence
are shown in a darker tone. Much of the current evidence on the provision of the supplies listed in this figure is either emerging or
deemed insufficient (see Health and social responses: provision of harm reduction equipment for high-risk drug use and Spotlight on...
Understanding and using evidence).
Harm reduction approaches have been broadened in some EU Member States to encompass
additional responses. These include supervised drug consumption rooms and take-home naloxone
programmes designed to reduce fatal overdoses (Figure 13.2). Interventions to reduce opioidrelated deaths include measures aimed at tackling vulnerability, preventing overdoses from
occurring and preventing fatal outcomes when overdoses do occur (Figure 13.3).
- 3 -

Figure 13.2. Number of European countries implementing selected harm reduction
interventions, up to 2024
Implementation at any level, including pilot projects, is included.
- 4 -

Figure 13.3. Interventions to prevent opioid-related deaths, by intended aim and evidence of
benefit
Note: Interventions where there is evidence of benefit and where we can have high or reasonable confidence in the available evidence
are highlighted in a bolder frame. Much of the current evidence on interventions listed in this figure is either emerging or deemed
insufficient, in part because of the practical and methodological difficulties of conducting research, especially in developing randomised
controlled trials (see Spotlight on... Understanding and using evidence) and also because service delivery models often differ
considerably.
Drug consumption rooms provide supervised, hygienic spaces for people to use drugs. Sterile
injecting equipment and safer use advice, including overdose prevention, are provided and staff
can respond to on-site overdoses. These services may also link marginalised people with other
harm reduction, treatment, healthcare and social services. They may also help reduce levels of
public injecting. While evidence is still developing and evaluation is challenging, available data
indicate that drug consumption rooms can contribute to reducing drug-related deaths (see also
Health and social responses: drug consumption rooms).
Take-home naloxone programmes provide overdose risk and response training and distribute
naloxone kits to people likely to witness an opioid overdose. While increasing numbers of
individuals have been trained in administering naloxone, coverage and access issues still exist in
some in EU Member States providing the intervention (see Opioid-related deaths: health and social
responses).
In some countries, drug checking services allow people to understand what the illicit drugs they
have bought contain. With many synthetic stimulants and new psychoactive substances now
available on the illicit market in similar-looking powders or pills, consumers may be unaware of
what they are consuming. When offered within drug consumption rooms, drug checking can reach
more vulnerable groups and may help reduce overdose risk linked to unexpected or potent
opioids. Drug checking services provide insights into current drug market trends and consumer
- 5 -

preferences, ultimately supporting targeted risk communications and alerts (see also Synthetic
stimulants – the current situation in Europe and MDMA – the current situation in Europe).
The increased integration of the markets for new psychoactive substances and illicit drugs has
created new public health challenges. Examples include hemp mixed with synthetic and semisynthetic cannabinoids; stimulants mixed with various substances, sometimes including synthetic
cathinones; ketamine; or new synthetic opioids (e.g. nitazenes) mixed with or mis-sold as heroin
(see also New psychoactive substances – the current situation in Europe). As poisoning events can
evolve rapidly, risk communication has become more important. For example, when
isotonitazepyne, a potent nitazene opioid mis-sold as oxycodone tablets, was linked to a fatal
overdose in the Netherlands in March 2025, a rapid risk alert communication was issued to warn
unsuspecting opioid consumers who may have purchased similar tablets (Figure 13.4). Events like
this underline the need for coordinated systems such as the EUDA’s new European Drug Alert
System, which supports EU and national preparedness and response activities to serious drugrelated risks through rapid information exchange, targeted alerts and other risk communications.
Given developments in the synthetic opioids market, preparedness planning will be important and
can focus on enhancing toxicological capacity, alert messaging and supporting the readiness of
frontline health and social services. 
- 6 -

Figure 13.4. A rapid risk communication issued in Netherlands, 2025
- 7 -

- 8 -

Growing stimulant use highlights gaps in harm reduction
service provision
HIV outbreaks associated with the injection of illicit stimulants have been documented in 7
European cities, across 6 EU Member States during the last decade. Stimulant use is associated
with a potentially higher frequency of injection compared with heroin use, while crushing and
dissolving crack cocaine and other tablets for injection also brings with it additional health risks.
High levels of harm reduction service coverage are needed to prevent and rapidly contain
infectious disease outbreaks.
Synthetic stimulants and other substances are sometimes consumed to facilitate and enhance sex
in the context of sexualised drug use, known as ‘chemsex’, by various groups but mainly among a
small sub-population of men who have sex with men. Engaging with and providing effective harm
reduction responses for this group is challenging due to a lack of integrated service provision,
tailored harm reduction interventions and limited knowledge of the prevalence of this pattern of
use. Addressing this issue requires strong multi-agency partnerships between sexual health
services and harm reduction services.
Diverse drug problems highlight the need to scale up harm
reduction services
Despite cannabis being Europe’s most consumed illicit drug, harm reduction advice and
interventions are often lacking. Cannabis resin and herb are typically of higher potency than in the
past and are associated with more acute and chronic harms. Greater product diversity, with
edibles, e-liquids and extracts available, alongside increased availability of semi-synthetic
cannabinoids, complicates the identification and implementation of effective harm reduction
interventions in this area.
Various other substances present additional harm reduction provision challenges. Among these
are the unpredictable health effects posed by new psychoactive substances appearing in powders
or used in e-liquids for vaping. While difficult to quantify, the potential risk of bladder damage
from ketamine use and risk of spinal cord degeneration and peripheral neuropathy from vitamin
B12 deficiency induced by the use of nitrous oxide canisters present emerging challenges to harm
reduction, treatment and linkage to services (e.g. urology, neurology).
Across the European Union, coverage and access to harm reduction services vary widely and
remain below estimated needs in some countries. Rapidly changing drug markets, characterised
by more complex use patterns, new substances and mixtures, and risks concentrated in specific
groups or settings, underline the need to further develop and evaluate responses such as drug
consumption rooms and drug checking services. The EUDA’s Health and social responses to drug
problems: a European guide provides more information on the evidence for harm reduction and
other interventions.
- 9 -

Key data and trends
Needle and syringe programmes
In 2024, needle and syringe programmes were in place in all EU Member States and Norway.
Only 7 of the 25 countries with available data had reached the 2025 WHO service provision
target in 2024 (Figure 13.5); only 4 of these countries also provide data on the coverage of
opioid agonist treatment.
Opioid agonist treatment
In 2024, of the 22 countries with available data, 14 had reached the 2025 WHO service provision
target for opioid agonist treatment (Figure 13.5); only 9 of these also provide data on the
coverage of needle and syringe provision.
A range of opioid agonist medications are prescribed in Europe, with methadone received by
61% of opioid agonist treatment clients, while another 36% receive buprenorphine.
- 10 -

Figure 13.5. Needle and syringe distribution and opioid agonist treatment coverage in
relation to WHO 2025 targets, 2024 or latest available estimate
The coverage is based on the latest national estimates of injecting drug use and high-risk opioid use matched by harm reduction activity
data (within a maximum of 2 years). The estimate of coverage of opioid agonist treatment for Belgium is derived from a subnational
study conducted in 2019.
Take-home naloxone programmes
Up to 2025, take-home naloxone programmes were available in 19 European countries (Figure
13.6).
The number of naloxone kits distributed by take-home programmes was reported by 10 of the
19 countries for 2024, with 8 reporting an increase compared with 2023.
Naloxone was used as a nasal spray in 17 of these countries and injectable naloxone
formulations were used in 7 countries.
- 11 -

Injectable naloxone 0.4 mg/1 ml vials (as included in the WHO essential medicines list) were
used in five countries: Ireland, Spain, Italy, Lithuania and Portugal.
Naloxone is available over the counter in Denmark, France, Italy, Sweden and Norway.
Figure 13.6. Availability of take-home naloxone, available formulations, number of persons
trained and number of kits given out, in Europe
Note: Data are for EU Member States, Norway and Türkiye in 2024. In Greece in 2023, a law was issued for take-home naloxone; in
2025, a ministerial decree was issued allowing the implementation of the programme.
Drug checking services
Eleven European countries reported the provision of some type of drug checking service in 2025
(12 in 2024). The services use various techniques (Figure 13.7) and operate in a range of
settings, including festivals, drug consumption rooms and at fixed locations in the community.
- 12 -

Figure 13.7. An illustration of the range of drug checking technologies available and their
relative accuracy and reliability
Drug checking technologies ranked in order of increasing accuracy and reliability of results:
Multiple methods
(most accurate and reliable)
High-performance liquid chromatography
Fourier transform spectroscopy
Thin-layer chromatography
Reagent test kit
(least accurate and reliable)
Drug consumption rooms
In 2025, a total of 100 drug consumption rooms were operational in 13 EU Member States and
Norway (Figure 13.8). Service provision includes supervised injecting, supervised use of
stimulants (e.g. smoking crack), drug checking, provision of hygienic equipment and other
forms of health and social support.
- 13 -

Figure 13.8. Location and number of drug consumption facilities throughout Europe, 2025
Geographical coordinates are approximate. A single point on the map may represent more than one drug consumption facility. Hover
over a marker to view location‐specific details.
Interventions in prisons
EUDA data on harm reduction and treatment interventions available in prisons in 2024 show
that continuity of opioid agonist treatment between the community and prison settings was
available in all but one EU Member State (Slovakia), and in Norway and Türkiye. Initiation of
opioid agonist treatment in prison was not allowed in 3 countries (Bulgaria, Latvia, Slovakia).
Needle and syringe programmes were available in prisons in 4 countries: in all prisons in Spain
and Luxembourg (1 prison), in 10 prisons in France and in 1 prison for women in Germany.
Naloxone provision upon release from prison was available in 10 countries in 2024 (Germany,
Estonia, Ireland, Greece, France, Croatia, Italy, Luxembourg, Slovenia, Norway). The number of
countries reporting the official availability of selected harm reduction interventions (Figure 13.9)
increased in 2024 compared with 2023.
- 14 -

In 2025, ECDC and the EUDA jointly launched a toolkit for the elimination of viral hepatitis in
prison.
Figure 13.9. Availability of drug-related and other health and social care interventions
targeting people who use drugs and are in prison, Europe, 2024
Number of countries where the intervention was officially available in 2024
- 15 -

Availability of interventions in prison settings
Select an intervention from the dropdown list below
Medical check-up within 48 hours of prison entry
The data used to generate infographics and charts on this page may be found below.
The complete set of source data for the European Drug Report 2026, including metadata and
methodological notes, is available in our data catalogue.
A subset of this data, used to generate infographics, charts and similar elements on this page, may
be found below.
- 16 -

View this data in our Data catalogue
Download all files (zip) 
Table EDR26-HR-1. Number of European countries implementing harm reduction interventions,
up to 2025
Table EDR26-HR-2. Availability of take-home naloxone in Europe
Table EDR26-HR-3. Needle and syringe distribution and opioid agonist treatment coverage in
relation to WHO 2020 targets, 2023 or latest available estimate
Table EDR26-HR-4. Location and number of drug consumption facilities throughout Europe 2025
Table EDR26-HR-5. Availability of drug-related and other health and social care interventions
targeting people who use drugs and are in prison, EU+2, 2024
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/harm-reduction_en. Some errors may have
occurred during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 17 -

Annex tables to the European Drug Report
2026
These tables, produced specifically for the European Drug
Report, provide national data for estimates of drug use
prevalence including problem opioid use, opioid substitution
treatment, total number in treatment, treatment entry,
injecting drug use, drug-induced deaths, drug-related
infectious diseases, syringe distribution and drug seizures.
The data are drawn from and are a subset of the Statistical
Bulletin 2026, where notes and meta-data are available. The
years to which data refer are indicated. In addition, for some
indicators, these data tables also provide total values for the
European Union as well as for all EUDA reporting countries
(EU Member States, Türkiye and Norway).
This page is part of the European Drug Report 2026, the
EUDA’s annual overview of the drug situation in Europe.
Last update: 9 June 2026
List of tables
Opioids
Table 1a. High-risk opioid use estimates for the population aged 15 to 64 years
Table 1b. Entrants into treatment during the year: opioids clients as a proportion of
treatment demands
Table 1c. Entrants into treatment during the year: proportion of opioids clients with injection
as main route of administration
Table 1d. Number of clients in opioid agonist treatment
Cocaine
Table 2a. Cocaine prevalence (percent) estimates among the general population and school
students
- 1 -

Table 2b. Entrants into treatment during the year: cocaine clients as a proportion of
treatment demands
Table 2c. Entrants into treatment during the year: proportion of cocaine clients with injection
as main route of administration
Amphetamines
Table 3a. Amphetamines prevalence (percent) estimates among the general population and
school students
Table 3b. Entrants into treatment during the year: amphetamines clients as a proportion of
treatment demands
Table 3c. Entrants into treatment during the year: proportion of amphetamines clients with
injection as main route of administration
MDMA
Table 4a. MDMA prevalence (percent) estimates among the general population and school
students
Table 4b. Entrants into treatment during the year: MDMA clients as a proportion of treatment
demands
Cannabis
Table 5a. Cannabis prevalence (percent) estimates among the general population and school
students
Table 5b. Entrants into treatment during the year: cannabis clients as a proportion of
treatment demands
Other indicators
Table 6. Drug-induced deaths, HIV diagnoses, injecting drug use estimates, take-home
naloxone, syringes distributed through specialised programmes
Seizures
Table 7. Seizures data
- 2 -

Opioids
Table 1a. High-risk opioid use estimates for the population aged 15 to 64 years (European
Drug Report 2026)
Country
Year of estimate cases per 1000
Belgium
‒
‒
Bulgaria
‒
‒
Czechia
2024
1.3-1.4
Denmark
2016
4.0-9.6
Germany
2023
1.5-1.8
Estonia
‒
‒
Ireland
2022
5.8-6.9
Greece
2024
0.8-1.2
Spain
2023
1.2-2.1
France
2023
5.8-6.1
Croatia
2015
2.5-4.0
Italy
2024
2.7-4.2
Cyprus
2024
1.0-2.0
Latvia
2017
4.7-7.0
Lithuania
2016
2.7-6.5
Luxembourg 2024
3.3
Hungary
2010-11
0.4-0.5
Malta
2024
3.3-4.9
Netherlands 2024
1.1-1.2
Austria
2023
5.9-6.3
Poland
2014
0.4-0.7
Portugal
2022
2.7-6.0
Romania
2020
1.0-1.7
Slovenia
2024
3.0-3.7
Slovakia
2024
0.6-1.4
Finland
2022
7.3-8.3
Sweden
‒
‒
Türkiye
2011
0.2-0.5
Norway
2013
2.0-4.2
Notes
High-risk opioid use estimates relate to the population aged 15 to 64 years, except for Italy (15 to 84).
- 3 -

Table 1b. Entrants into treatment during the year: opioids clients as a proportion of
treatment demands (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
All opioids
entrants - %
All opioids
entrants -
count
First-time
opioids
entrants - %
First-time opioids
entrants - count
Previously treated
opioids entrants -
%
Previously treated
opioids entrants -
count
Belgium
11.9
1266
5
190
16.4
1022
Bulgaria
47.9
455
18.1
73
69.9
356
Czechia
16
1792
9.1
421
20.8
1371
Denmark
14.6
1098
12.4
398
16.3
667
Germany
14.1
5128
8.2
1621
21.5
3208
Estonia
52.7
214
30.6
34
60.8
177
Ireland
25.3
3199
8.7
413
37.3
2645
Greece
38.4
1393
18
282
54
1099
Spain
17.4
8467
9
2400
29
5562
France
23.8
13566
17.9
4583
40.3
6720
Croatia
53
1037
17.9
123
72
914
Italy
28.3
9358
16.4
2523
38.8
6835
Cyprus
12.1
82
8.5
33
19.1
46
Latvia
33.3
275
20.1
92
49.7
183
Lithuania
51.6
275
18.6
16
76.2
243
Luxembourg
22.1
48
9.9
9
31
39
Hungary
5.3
191
2
54
17.1
134
Malta
41.8
882
14.8
76
50.4
806
Netherlands
9.8
1475
7.5
715
13.8
760
Austria
40.8
1691
25.7
425
50.7
1266
Poland
11.6
475
5.4
105
17.7
360
Portugal
25.7
925
12.7
244
40.4
681
Romania
17.3
390
6
88
37.8
302
Slovenia
63.8
134
42.7
35
79.2
99
Slovakia
10.8
276
5.7
65
15.4
203
Finland
37.3
85
33.7
28
39.3
57
Sweden
26.9
8826
14.1
1841
35.6
6904
Türkiye
32.2
3544
20.1
1141
44.9
2403
Norway
16.9
985
12.2
293
20.3
692
European Union
21.2
63003
11.9
16887
32
42659
EU, Türkiye and
Norway
21.5
67532
12.2
18321
32.2
45754
Notes
Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. For entrants into treatment
during the year, percentages shown are for entrants for which the substance is known.
Norway: The percentage of clients in treatment for opioid-related problems is a minimum value, not accounting for opioid clients
registered as polydrug users.
- 4 -

Table 1c. Entrants into treatment during the year: proportion of opioids clients with injection
as main route of administration (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
All opioids
entrants - %
All opioids
entrants -
count
First-time
opioids
entrants - %
First-time opioids
entrants - count
Previously treated
opioids entrants - %
Previously treated
opioids entrants -
count
Belgium
10.9
122
6.4
11
11.3
102
Bulgaria
57.7
259
57.5
42
58
204
Czechia
Denmark
6
63
1.6
6
8.9
57
Germany
15.4
539
10.1
112
17.7
384
Estonia
73.1
155
61.8
21
74.9
131
Ireland
26.2
813
13
53
27.5
705
Greece
20.9
289
16.4
46
22
241
Spain
8.5
677
5.5
131
9.6
513
France
15.2
1309
11.4
114
17.4
1021
Croatia
55.6
553
26.8
30
59.2
523
Italy
37.7
3026
24.3
494
42.3
2532
Cyprus
34.1
28
18.2
6
47.8
22
Latvia
66.5
177
52.8
47
73.4
130
Lithuania
69.8
187
50
8
71.2
171
Luxembourg
33.3
16
22.2
2
35.9
14
Hungary
67.5
129
61.1
33
70.9
95
Malta
45.6
388
41.8
28
46
360
Netherlands
5.1
24
4.6
12
5.6
12
Austria
27
376
22.3
76
28.5
300
Poland
44.1
207
35.9
37
47.1
168
Portugal
11.1
97
10.1
23
11.5
74
Romania
74.9
280
63.5
54
78.2
226
Slovenia
20
26
2.9
1
26.3
25
Slovakia
62.4
171
54.7
35
65.8
133
Finland
69.4
59
67.9
19
70.2
40
Sweden
57.7
45
Türkiye
18.7
661
13.2
151
21.2
510
Norway
European Union
25.1
11074
17.2
1687
28.3
8902
EU, Türkiye and
Norway
25.1
12025
16.8
1838
27.8
9412
Notes
Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. For entrants into treatment
during the year, percentages shown are for entrants for which the substance is known. Missing cases of 30% or more for main route of
administration: Czechia, Germany, France, the Netherlands. 
Sweden: Data for main route of administration are for compulsory institutional care only, therefore not representative of the national
- 5 -

picture.
Table 1d. Number of clients in opioid agonist treatment (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
Count
Belgium
14474
Bulgaria
2676
Czechia
5436
Denmark
6134
Germany
80400
Estonia
1160
Ireland
11233
Greece
8349
Spain
54752
France
171000
Croatia
4360
Italy
75711
Cyprus
287
Latvia
680
Lithuania
991
Luxembourg
1196
Hungary
526
Malta
826
Netherlands
3504
Austria
20939
Poland
4286
Portugal
16402
Romania
1686
Slovenia
2881
Slovakia
600
Finland
9935
Sweden
4191
Türkiye
3544
Norway
8438
European Union
504615
EU, Türkiye and Norway 516597
Notes
Data on clients in agonist treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Italy, 2018; Hungary, 2022; Netherlands, Spain, Türkiye,
2023.
Czechia: Number of clients in agonist treatment is an estimate derived from the treatment demand register and opioid agonist
treatment provided by general practitioners.
Netherlands: Data on the number of clients in agonist treatment are not complete.
- 6 -

Cocaine
Table 2a. Cocaine prevalence (percent) estimates among the general population and school
students (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
Year of
survey
General population surveys -
lifetime, all adults (15-64)
General population surveys - last 12
months, young adults (15-34)
School surveys - lifetime,
students (15-16)
Belgium
2024
‒
2.2
1.2
Bulgaria
2024
1.7
2.2
2.6
Czechia
2023
2.2
0.9
1.9
Denmark
2023
9.4
4.2
2
Germany
2024
5.3
2.2
2
Estonia
2023
7.3
4.6
2.6
Ireland
2023
9.3
5
2
Greece
2015
1.3
0.6
2.4
Spain
2024
13.3
3.1
2.8
France
2023
9.4
4.4
1.7
Croatia
2019
4.8
3.9
2.7
Italy
2022
6.6
2.1
1.7
Cyprus
2022
2.2
1.1
6.2
Latvia
2020
2.7
2.2
2.5
Lithuania
2021
1.8
0.8
2.3
Luxembourg 2019
2.9
0.9
1.1
Hungary
2023
1
0.2
3
Malta
2023
1.2
0.1
1.3
Netherlands 2024
9.1
5.3
1.2
Austria
2022
6.2
2.2
2.6
Poland
2024
1.5
0.5
3
Portugal
2022
1.1
0.5
1.6
Romania
2024
2.1
1.3
1.7
Slovenia
2023
3.1
2
3.3
Slovakia
2023
2.1
1.1
2.4
Finland
2022
5.8
3.1
1.1
Sweden
2021
‒
2.8
0.8
Türkiye
2017
0.168
0.082
‒
Norway
2024
8.7
5.6
2.9
Notes
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, Greece, France, Italy and Hungary; 16-64
and 16-34 for Denmark, Estonia and Norway; 17-34 for Sweden; 18-65 and 18-34 for Malta.
Prevalence estimates for the school population are extracted from the 2024 ESPAD survey, except for Belgium (2024, VAD School Survey
– Flanders only), Luxembourg (2022, HBSC), Portugal (2024, ECATD-CAD), Spain (2025, ESTUDES) and Sweden (2024, CAN Survey). ESPAD
data for Germany refer to Bavaria only. Age range is 15-16.
- 7 -

Table 2b. Entrants into treatment during the year: cocaine clients as a proportion of
treatment demands (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
All cocaine
entrants - %
All cocaine
entrants -
count
First-time
cocaine
entrants - %
First-time cocaine
entrants - count
Previously treated
cocaine entrants -
%
Previously treated
cocaine entrants -
count
Belgium
34.7
3700
30.7
1161
35.8
2235
Bulgaria
11.2
106
13.9
56
8.4
43
Czechia
2.1
238
2.4
112
1.9
126
Denmark
25.2
1904
24.3
782
26
1067
Germany
13
4721
13
2550
12.7
1901
Estonia
4.9
20
7.2
8
3.8
11
Ireland
39.6
5012
46.8
2235
35.1
2489
Greece
27.4
994
32.3
506
23.8
484
Spain
50
24323
49.6
13281
50.9
9752
France
16.5
9382
16.4
4197
16.1
2681
Croatia
10.2
199
20
138
4.8
61
Italy
42.7
14086
44.3
6818
41.2
7268
Cyprus
27.1
184
20
78
36.9
89
Latvia
6.1
50
8.1
37
3.5
13
Lithuania
5.8
31
14
12
3.1
10
Luxembourg
35.5
77
37.4
34
34.1
43
Hungary
5.3
188
5.7
156
3.4
27
Malta
42.5
898
60.5
310
36.8
588
Netherlands
27.1
4087
22.7
2171
34.9
1916
Austria
22.8
946
28.4
469
19.1
477
Poland
3.9
159
3.7
72
4.1
83
Portugal
33.8
1218
36.6
701
30.7
517
Romania
4.1
93
4.7
69
3
24
Slovenia
15.2
32
20.7
17
10.4
13
Slovakia
2.1
53
2.4
28
1.8
24
Finland
1.3
3
3.6
3
0
0
Sweden
2.3
759
3.9
504
1.3
244
Türkiye
4
445
3.8
217
4.3
228
Norway
7.5
437
10.6
254
5.4
183
European Union
24.7
73463
25.7
36505
24.1
32186
EU, Türkiye and
Norway
23.7
74345
24.7
36976
22.9
32597
Notes
Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. For entrants into treatment
during the year, percentages shown are for entrants for which the substance is known. 
- 8 -

Table 2c. Entrants into treatment during the year: proportion of cocaine clients with
injection as main route of administration (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
All cocaine
entrants - %
All cocaine
entrants -
count
First-time
cocaine
entrants - %
First-time cocaine
entrants - count
Previously treated
cocaine entrants - %
Previously treated
cocaine entrants -
count
Belgium
2.3
77
0.9
10
3.1
64
Bulgaria
1
1
0
0
2.4
1
Czechia
Denmark
1.5
27
0.5
4
2.2
23
Germany
0.9
29
0.5
9
1.5
19
Estonia
5
1
9.1
1
Ireland
0.7
36
1.1
28
Greece
7
69
2.4
12
11.8
57
Spain
0.5
127
0.3
42
0.9
81
France
4.7
268
2.8
29
7.6
185
Croatia
2.1
4
1.5
2
3.3
2
Italy
1.7
217
0.9
54
2.4
163
Cyprus
0.6
1
0
0
1.1
1
Latvia
0
0
0
0
0
0
Lithuania
Luxembourg
18.4
14
9.1
3
25.6
11
Hungary
1.6
3
1.3
2
3.7
1
Malta
5.1
45
3.9
12
5.7
33
Netherlands
0.3
5
0.2
2
0.4
3
Austria
3.9
34
2.1
9
5.5
25
Poland
1.3
2
0
0
2.5
2
Portugal
1.2
14
0.9
6
1.6
8
Romania
0
0
0
0
0
0
Slovenia
10
3
6.2
1
15.4
2
Slovakia
5.7
3
7.1
2
4.2
1
Finland
50
1
50
1
0
0
Sweden
36.4
4
Türkiye
1.1
5
0.5
1
1.8
4
Norway
European Union
1.6
988
0.7
204
2.5
713
EU, Türkiye and
Norway
1.6
993
0.7
205
2.5
717
Notes
Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. For entrants into treatment
during the year, percentages shown are for entrants for which the substance is known.
Missing cases of 30% or more for main route of administration: Germany, France, the Netherlands.
Sweden: Data for main route of administration are for compulsory institutional care only, therefore not representative of the national
- 9 -

picture.
- 10 -

Amphetamines
Table 3a. Amphetamines prevalence (percent) estimates among the general population and
school students (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
Year of
survey
General population surveys -
lifetime, all adults (15-64)
General population surveys - last 12
months, young adults (15-34)
School surveys - lifetime,
students (15-16)
Belgium
2018
‒
0.8
–
Bulgaria
2024
6.4
4.3
2
Czechia
2023
3.8
1.3
1.4
Denmark
2023
7.9
1
1.2
Germany
2024
5.2
1.7
2.3
Estonia
2023
8
5.1
2.9
Ireland
2023
0.8
0.8
Greece
‒
‒
‒
1.7
Spain
2024
5
0.8
1.1
France
2023
4.3
1.1
1.3
Croatia
2019
4.6
3.5
1.9
Italy
2022
2.2
1.3
1.5
Cyprus
2022
0.9
0.9
2.7
Latvia
2020
1.8
1.2
2.4
Lithuania
2021
1.4
0.6
1.7
Luxembourg 2019
1.3
0.3
–
Hungary
2023
1.8
0
4.3
Malta
2023
0.1
1
Netherlands 2024
7
3
1.3
Austria
2022
4.9
1.9
1.3
Poland
2024
3.1
1.4
3.4
Portugal
2016
0.4
1.2
Romania
2024
1.1
0.8
1.1
Slovenia
2023
2.7
1.1
1.6
Slovakia
2023
1.3
0.1
1.9
Finland
2022
7.6
4
1.5
Sweden
2021
‒
1.6
2.4
Türkiye
2017
0.033
‒
‒
Norway
2024
6.1
1.8
2.3
Notes
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, France, Italy and Hungary; 16-64 and 1634 for Denmark, Estonia and Norway; 17-34 for Sweden; 18-34 for Malta.
Prevalence estimates for the school population are extracted from the 2024 ESPAD survey. ESPAD data for Germany refer to Bavaria
only. Data refer only to amphetamine. Age range is 15-16.
- 11 -

Table 3b. Entrants into treatment during the year: amphetamines clients as a proportion of
treatment demands (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
All
amphetamin
es entrants -
%
All
amphetamines
entrants -
count
First-time
amphetamines
entrants - %
First-time
amphetamines
entrants - count
Previously treated
amphetamines
entrants - %
Previously treated
amphetamines
entrants - count
Belgium
7.4
789
4.5
171
9.5
595
Bulgaria
15.1
143
20.3
82
11.6
59
Czechia
48
5390
50.6
2339
46.2
3051
Denmark
6.1
461
5
161
7
287
Germany
15.8
5726
12.5
2467
20.7
3094
Estonia
26.1
106
34.2
38
23.4
68
Ireland
0.7
88
1
49
0.5
35
Greece
1.7
62
1.9
29
1.6
33
Spain
2.2
1085
2.4
642
2.1
405
France
0.4
255
0.5
116
0.5
76
Croatia
7.5
147
12.5
86
4.8
61
Italy
0.4
127
0.5
75
0.3
52
Cyprus
11.2
76
8.7
34
16.2
39
Latvia
18.1
149
17.1
78
19.3
71
Lithuania
7.1
38
9.3
8
6.6
21
Luxembourg
0.9
2
1.1
1
0.8
1
Hungary
13.4
478
13.3
361
13.8
108
Malta
0.2
4
0.2
1
0.2
3
Netherlands
4.7
708
4.4
419
5.3
289
Austria
4.5
187
4.1
68
4.8
119
Poland
30.9
1264
31.6
620
30.5
620
Portugal
0.4
16
0.7
13
0.2
3
Romania
5.1
116
6
88
3.5
28
Slovenia
2.4
5
4.9
4
0
0
Slovakia
48.6
1243
55.2
632
42.3
556
Finland
23.7
54
16.9
14
27.6
40
Sweden
9.2
3027
12.5
1629
6.6
1277
Türkiye
39.2
4325
47.4
2686
30.6
1639
Norway
13.8
805
9.5
229
16.9
576
European Union 7.3
21746
7.2
10225
8.2
10991
EU, Türkiye and
Norway
8.6
26876
8.8
13140
9.3
13206
Notes
Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. For entrants into treatment
during the year, percentages shown are for entrants for which the substance is known.
Sweden: Data on entrants into treatment are for ‘stimulants other than cocaine’.
- 12 -

Norway: Data treatment entrants are for 'stimulants other than cocaine'.
 
- 13 -

Table 3c. Entrants into treatment during the year: proportion of amphetamines clients with
injection as main route of administration (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
All
amphetamin
es entrants -
%
All
amphetamines
entrants -
count
First-time
amphetamines
entrants - %
First-time
amphetamines
entrants - count
Previously treated
amphetamines
entrants - %
Previously treated
amphetamines
entrants - count
Belgium
9.6
63
4.6
7
11.2
55
Bulgaria
1.5
2
0
0
3.9
2
Czechia
Denmark
0.9
4
1.4
4
Germany
2.2
79
1.2
20
3.1
56
Estonia
60.4
64
47.4
18
67.6
46
Ireland
15.7
13
16.7
8
15.2
5
Greece
4.9
3
3.6
1
6.1
2
Spain
4.4
47
4.6
29
4.6
18
France
10.1
14
0
0
12.5
8
Croatia
1.4
2
0
0
3.4
2
Italy
4.5
5
4.8
3
4.1
2
Cyprus
7.9
6
2.9
1
12.8
5
Latvia
47.4
63
35.8
24
59.1
39
Lithuania
11.1
1
Luxembourg
Hungary
0.6
3
2.8
3
Malta
25
1
33.3
1
Netherlands
2.4
8
1.6
3
3.6
5
Austria
6.1
10
8.8
5
4.7
5
Poland
1
13
0.3
2
1.8
11
Portugal
33.3
5
33.3
4
33.3
1
Romania
0
0
0
0
0
0
Slovenia
0
0
0
0
0
0
Slovakia
29
358
26.7
168
31.1
171
Finland
75
36
30
3
86.8
33
Sweden
53.6
60
Türkiye
0.9
41
0.7
18
1.4
23
Norway
European Union 20.3
2686
17.3
1083
22.4
1450
EU, Türkiye and
Norway
17.3
3133
12.3
1101
18.2
1473
Notes
Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. For entrants into treatment
during the year, percentages shown are for entrants for which the substance is known. Missing cases of 30% or more for main route of
administration: Germany, France, the Netherlands. 
- 14 -

Sweden: Data for main route of administration are for compulsory institutional care only, therefore not representative of the national
picture. 
Norway: Data treatment entrants are for 'stimulants other than cocaine'.
- 15 -

MDMA
Table 4a. MDMA prevalence (percent) estimates among the general population and school
students (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
Year of
survey
General population surveys -
lifetime, all adults (15-64)
General population surveys - last 12
months, young adults (15-34)
School surveys - lifetime,
students (15-16)
Belgium
2024
‒
2.2
1.6
Bulgaria
2024
4
3
2.1
Czechia
2023
10.2
6.6
2.6
Denmark
2023
5
1.1
1.2
Germany
2024
5.2
2.3
1.8
Estonia
2023
7.3
4.4
3.3
Ireland
2023
7.5
2.2
1.6
Greece
2015
0.6
0.4
1.9
Spain
2024
5.1
1.4
2.2
France
2023
8.2
3.8
1.1
Croatia
2023
4.5
1.9
2.6
Italy
2022
3.8
2.1
1.3
Cyprus
2022
2.4
1.8
4.7
Latvia
2020
1.9
1.6
2.8
Lithuania
2021
1.8
0.8
1.6
Luxembourg 2019
2
0.9
1.4
Hungary
2023
2.8
0.9
4.6
Malta
2023
1
0.1
1.5
Netherlands 2024
14.4
10.2
2.3
Austria
2022
4.9
1.5
2.2
Poland
2024
1.6
0.4
3.1
Portugal
2022
0.9
0.3
1.1
Romania
2024
1.5
0.9
1.1
Slovenia
2023
3.3
1.9
3.2
Slovakia
2023
4.9
2.1
3
Finland
2022
6.8
2.5
1.3
Sweden
2021
‒
2
2.1
Türkiye
2017
0.353
0.159
‒
Norway
2024
6.8
3.1
3.3
Notes
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, Greece, France, Italy and Hungary; 16-64
and 16-34 for Denmark, Estonia and Norway; 17-34 for Sweden; 18-65 and 18-34 for Malta.
Prevalence estimates for the school population are extracted from the 2024 ESPAD survey, except for Belgium (2025, VAD School Survey
– Flanders only), Luxembourg (2024, HBSC), Portugal (2024, ECATD-CAD), Spain (2025, ESTUDES) and Sweden (2024, CAN Survey). ESPAD
data for Germany refer to Bavaria only. Age range is 15-16.
- 16 -

Table 4b. Entrants into treatment during the year: MDMA clients as a proportion of
treatment demands (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
All MDMA
entrants - %
All MDMA
entrants -
count
First-time
MDMA entrants
- %
First-time MDMA
entrants - count
Previously treated
MDMA entrants - %
Previously treated
MDMA entrants -
count
Belgium
0.3
32
0.5
19
0.2
12
Bulgaria
2.2
21
3.5
14
1
5
Czechia
1.2
132
1.5
71
0.9
61
Denmark
0.2
18
0.3
9
0.2
8
Germany
0.5
199
0.7
140
0.3
47
Estonia
Ireland
0.1
11
0.2
8
Greece
0.2
8
0.3
4
0.2
4
Spain
0.3
158
0.5
132
0.1
23
France
0.4
228
0.4
106
0.3
48
Croatia
0.8
15
0.7
5
0.8
10
Italy
0.1
46
0.2
28
0.1
18
Cyprus
Latvia
1.2
10
1.8
8
0.5
2
Lithuania
1.7
9
3.5
3
0.9
3
Luxembourg
Hungary
1.5
54
1.7
47
0.9
7
Malta
0.4
8
0.4
2
0.4
6
Netherlands
0.6
96
0.8
74
0.4
22
Austria
0.9
38
1.2
20
0.7
18
Poland
0.4
17
0.4
8
0.4
8
Portugal
0.5
19
0.8
16
0.2
3
Romania
1.2
26
1.1
16
1.3
10
Slovenia
0
0
0
0
0
0
Slovakia
0.3
7
0.4
5
0.2
2
Finland
0
0
0
0
0
0
Sweden
Türkiye
0.7
79
0.8
45
0.6
34
Norway
European Union
0.4
1152
0.5
735
0.2
319
EU, Türkiye and
Norway
0.4
1231
0.5
780
0.2
353
Notes
Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. For entrants into treatment
during the year, percentages shown are for entrants for which the substance is known.
- 17 -

Cannabis
Table 5a. Cannabis prevalence (percent) estimates among the general population and school
students (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
Year of
survey
General population surveys -
lifetime, all adults (15-64)
General population surveys - last 12
months, young adults (15-34)
School surveys - lifetime,
students (15-16)
Belgium
2024
30.9
14.4
10.6
Bulgaria
2024
12.1
8
11
Czechia
2023
31.5
18.1
24
Denmark
2023
37.6
12.5
12
Germany
2024
31.7
17.7
17
Estonia
2023
29.3
13.5
18
Ireland
2023
24.1
14.8
12
Greece
2015
11
4.5
11
Spain
2024
43.7
19.4
19.8
France
2023
50.4
18.9
8.4
Croatia
2023
24.6
16.6
15
Italy
2022
34.8
21.5
18
Cyprus
2022
18
10.6
8.2
Latvia
2020
15
8.2
16
Lithuania
2021
13.7
8.8
11
Luxembourg 2019
23.3
12
21.9
Hungary
2023
9.5
4.8
15
Malta
2023
5.9
1.2
11
Netherlands 2024
28.3
15.4
15
Austria
2020
22.7
11.1
17
Poland
2024
19.1
10.3
15
Portugal
2022
12.2
4.9
7.3
Romania
2024
6.7
3.8
4.9
Slovenia
2023
22
10.9
18
Slovakia
2023
23.1
10.2
19
Finland
2022
31.2
15.1
9.3
Sweden
2024
15.2
6
4.9
Türkiye
2017
2.725
1.846
‒
Norway
2024
30.1
11.8
10
Notes
Prevalence estimates for the general population: age ranges are 18-64 and 18-34 for Germany, Greece, France, Italy and Hungary; 16-64
and 16-34 for Denmark, Estonia, Sweden and Norway; 18-65 and 18-34 for Malta.
Prevalence estimates for the school population are extracted from the 2024 ESPAD survey, except for Belgium (2024, VAD School Survey
– Flanders only), Luxembourg (2022, HBSC), Portugal (2024, ECATD-CAD), Spain (2025, ESTUDES) and Sweden (2024, CAN Survey). ESPAD
data for Germany refer to Bavaria only. Due to possible overstating, Luxembourg cannabis lifetime prevalence may be slightly
- 18 -

overestimated. Age range all 15-16.
Table 5b. Entrants into treatment during the year: cannabis clients as a proportion of
treatment demands (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
All Cannabis
entrants - %
All Cannabis
entrants -
count
First-time
Cannabis
entrants - %
First-time
Cannabis entrants
- count
Previously treated
Cannabis entrants
- %
Previously treated
Cannabis entrants -
count
Belgium
30.5
3260
42.4
1605
23.7
1480
Bulgaria
17.3
164
31.3
126
7.3
37
Czechia
25.2
2832
29
1338
22.6
1494
Denmark
47
3545
52
1675
43.1
1767
Germany
52.1
18923
60.5
11903
40.7
6077
Estonia
9.4
38
15.3
17
7.2
21
Ireland
16.9
2143
27.5
1312
9.9
702
Greece
28.8
1045
44.6
698
16.7
340
Spain
26.1
12671
33.1
8869
15.9
3039
France
52.4
29857
59
15111
37
6162
Croatia
24.2
474
43.5
300
13.7
174
Italy
25.4
8393
34.5
5305
17.5
3088
Cyprus
48.4
329
61.5
240
26.6
64
Latvia
32.4
267
41.1
188
21.5
79
Lithuania
11.8
63
27.9
24
6.6
21
Luxembourg
40.6
88
50.5
46
33.3
42
Hungary
65.9
2359
69.5
1891
54
423
Malta
14.6
309
23.2
119
11.9
190
Netherlands
37.4
5635
42.6
4072
28.5
1563
Austria
27
1122
35.8
591
21.3
531
Poland
28.4
1161
33.4
655
23.5
478
Portugal
34.4
1240
42.5
814
25.3
426
Romania
44.3
1002
52
760
30.3
242
Slovenia
11
23
20.7
17
4.8
6
Slovakia
19
485
23.4
268
15.4
203
Finland
12.7
29
24.1
20
6.2
9
Sweden
9.2
3015
13.4
1744
6.4
1243
Türkiye
16.1
1771
18.9
1071
13.1
700
Norway
24.4
1420
32.1
769
19.1
651
European Union
33.8
100472
42.1
59708
22.4
29901
EU, Türkiye and
Norway
33
103663
41.1
61548
22
31252
Notes
Data on entrants into treatment are for 2024 or most recent year available: Spain, France, Türkiye, 2023. For entrants into treatment
during the year, percentages shown are for entrants for which the substance is known.
- 19 -

Other indicators
Table 6. Other indicators: drug-induced deaths, HIV diagnoses, injecting drug use estimates,
take-home naloxone, syringes distributed through specialised programmes (European Drug
Report 2026)
Country
Druginduc
ed
death
s -
Year
Druginduce
d
deaths
- All
ages -
Count
Druginduced
deaths -
Cases
per
million
populati
on -
Aged 1564
Druginduce
d
deaths
- Aged
15-64 -
Count
Druginduced
deaths -
All ages
-
Percent
age
Female
s
HIV
diagnose
s related
to
injecting
drug use
(ECDC) -
Cases
per
million
populati
on
HIV
diagnos
es
related
to
injectin
g drug
use
(ECDC) -
Count
Injectin
g drug
use
estimat
e - Year
of
estimat
e
Injecting
drug use
estimate
- Cases
per 1 000
populati
on
Takehome
naloxo
ne
progra
mmes
-
Availa
bility
Takehome
naloxon
e kits
distribut
ed -
Count
Syringes
distributed
through
specialised
programme
s
Belgium
2022
171
21
157
24
0.3
4
2019
0.5-1.0
No
–
1212666
Bulgaria
2024
48
12
48
12.5
5.6
36
2020
2.1-2.4
No
–
37961
Czechia
2024
73
10
68
26
1.6
17
2024
6.0-6.2
Yes
982
9067509
Denmark
2024
183
38
145
34.4
1.2
7
‒
‒
Yes
–
Germany
2024
1912
35
1861
18.6
3
248
‒
‒
Yes
–
3841198
Estonia
2024
100
112
98
18
2.9
4
2015
9.0-11.3
Yes
1982
1951326
Ireland
2022
279
78
262
27.2
1.7
9
‒
‒
Yes
–
342161
Greece
2022
228
33
221
18.9
9.3
97
2024
0.2-0.5
Yes
–
1385056
Spain
2023
1360
40
1270
21.5
1
50
2023
0.1-0.3
Yes
–
1139271
France
2023
732
17
705
20.7
1.1
73
2023
2.3-2.6
Yes
26162
9367396
Croatia
2024
71
28
68
16.9
0
0
2015
1.8-2.9
Yes
176
220556
Italy
2024
231
6
226
17.3
1.5
91
2021
2.1-3.5
Yes
–
Cyprus
2024
8
12
8
0
0
0
2024
0.5-1.2
Yes
14
23122
Latvia
2024
77
65
77
9.1
6.9
13
2016
5.3-6.8
No
–
1273718
Lithuania
2024
80
42
79
13.8
6.9
20
2016
4.4-4.9
Yes
1841
798109
Luxembourg
2024
12
26
12
16.7
4.5
3
2024
1.5
Yes
–
375892
Hungary
2024
23
3
21
26.1
0.1
1
2015
1
No
–
20891
Malta
2024
13
28
11
0
0
0
‒
‒
No
–
48526
Netherlands
2024
378
28
325
25.9
0.7
13
2015
0.07-0.09 No
–
Austria
2024
257
42
255
23.3
2.2
20
‒
‒
Yes
233
6980077
Poland
2023
396
13
298
35.4
0.8
29
‒
‒
No
–
135787
Portugal
2023
105
15
101
25.7
1.9
20
2022
0.4-3.9
Yes
–
1120862
Romania
2024
40
3
37
35
2.4
45
‒
‒
No
–
514760
Slovenia
2024
87
58
78
19.5
0.5
1
‒
‒
Yes
111
462869
Slovakia
2024
54
11
39
16.7
0.2
1
‒
‒
No
–
504754
Finland
2024
247
69
238
20.2
2.3
13
2022
8.2
Yes
–
6900000
- 20 -

Country
Druginduc
ed
death
s -
Year
Druginduce
d
deaths
- All
ages -
Count
Druginduced
deaths -
Casesper
million
populati
on -Aged
15-64
Druginduce
d
deathsAged
15-64 -
Count
Druginduced
deaths -
All ages
-
Percent
age
Female
s
HIV
diagnose
s related
to
injecting
drug use
(ECDC) -
Casesper
million
populati
on
HIV
diagnos
es
related
to
injectin
g drug
use
(ECDC) -
Count
Injectin
g drug
use
estimat
e - Year
of
estimat
e
Injecting
drug use
estimate
- Cases
per 1 000
populati
on
Takehome
naloxo
ne
progra
mmesAvaila
bility
Takehome
naloxon
e kits
distribut
ed -
Count
Syringes
distributed
through
specialised
programme
s
Sweden
2024
424
55
364
32.5
0.7
7
‒
‒
Yes
7802
2048586
Türkiye
2024
427
7
422
6.3
0.3
22
‒
‒
No
–
Norway
2024
303
75
270
25.4
3.6
20
2021
1.9-2.4
Yes
11009
3500000
European
Union
7589
24.8
7072
22.3
1.8
822
‒
‒
EU, Türkiye
and Norway
8319
22.4
7764
21.6
1.6
864
‒
‒
Notes
Data on drug-induced deaths must be interpreted with caution. Differences in methodology and data completeness should be
considered when comparing countries. The average mortality rate for the European Union (and the European Union plus Türkiye and
Norway) is computed as the weighted average of the mortality rates for the 27 (or 29) countries in 2024 – or the last available year –
using the population aged 15 to 64 in 2024 as weights. France changed the preferred source of data in 2024.
HIV diagnoses related to injecting drug use are from 2024.
Injecting drug use estimates refer to the population aged 15 to 64 years.
Syringes distributed through specialised programmes refer to 2024, except for Germany (2021), Spain (2023), France (2022), Finland
(2023) and Norway (2022).
Naloxone is available over the counter in Denmark, France, Italy and Sweden. In France, the latest numbers (2021) include kits given for
free by harm reduction and treatment facilities to their clients and kits ordered by pharmacies. In Luxembourg, since September 2024,
all high-risk drug users and people injecting drugs in one closed prison setting should receive a kit upon release. In Italy, availability is
limited to a small number of regions.
- 21 -

Seizures of drugs
Table 7. Seizures data (European Drug Report 2026)
Country
Heroin
-
Quanti
ty
seized
(kg)
Heroin -
Quantit
y seized
(count)
Cocaine -
Quantity
seized
(kg)
Cocaine -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Amphet
amine -
Quantit
y seized
(kg)
Amphet
amine -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Metham
phetami
ne -
Quantity
seized
(kg)
Methamp
hetamine
-
Quantity
seized
(count)
MDMA,
MDA, MDEA -
Quantity
seized
(tablets)
MDMA,
MDA,
MDEA -
Quantit
y seized
(kg)
MDMA,
MDA,
MDEA -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Belgium
234
12
44661
188
30
87
915
14
179769
1553
194
Bulgaria
868
158
525
340
91
599
21
1432
4750
230
126
Czechia
15
92
57
269
3
68
165
2182
12894
28
332
Denmark
10
207
2357
4856
1389
1858
18
297
185636
11
795
Germany
144
-
23761
-
2093
-
511
-
-
586
-
Estonia
<0.01
1
105
191
43
423
<1
18
-
10
124
Ireland
84
719
3257
3085
17
161
1087
56
-
34
543
Greece
158
2361
1116
1897
<1
26
77
522
20964
117
188
Spain
136
6922
124040
61200
1077
4047
1908
829
480810
579
8928
France
1045
-
53473
-
618
-
-
-
9090510
-
-
Croatia
8
120
119
967
145
1305
<1
69
-
23
642
Italy
348
1075
11029
8950
17
115
39
197
99788
21
490
Cyprus
<0.01
9
52
157
<0.1
3
0.5
180
696
1
24
Latvia
<1
4
13
243
92
589
<0.1
50
2506
5
276
Lithuania
<0.1
23
6
358
8
420
0.9
102
23
4
197
Luxembourg
1.5
77
3
292
<1
12
<0.1
6
177
1
19
Hungary
3
21
15
292
27
732
1
159
25964
10
550
Malta
1
11
2249
62
<0.1
2
1
2
87
1
11
Netherlands
376
714
37642
2772
51
650
493
3526
-
578
3124
Austria
27
833
259
2548
56
915
12
720
25286
20
904
Poland
13
365
414
720
2093
10082
743
2551
113045
157
1853
Portugal
94
658
23012
1644
13
137
4
23
2966
21
621
Romania
5
209
41
773
12
199
43
36
51059
7
645
Slovenia
3
317
226
338
17
147
4
15
10279
31
56
Slovakia
2
28
2
48
<0.1
4
10
677
2088
1
78
Finland
<0.1
12
110
433
700
1253
14
98
69036
16
482
Sweden
13
537
1832
4473
2821
9808
30
306
288614
112
2387
Türkiye
4344
6922
2481
5750
4221
4353
25927
60285
5139878
-
5831
Norway
37
349
223
1959
565
2975
22
176
60598
-
658
European
Union
3590
15485
330375
97096
11413
33642
6098
14067
10666946
4156
23589
- 22 -

Country
HeroinQuanti
ty
seized
(kg)
Heroin -
Quantit
y seized
(count)
Cocaine -
Quantity
seized
(kg)
Cocaine -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Amphet
amine -
Quantit
y seized
(kg)
Amphet
amine -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Metham
phetami
ne -
Quantity
seized
(kg)
Methamp
hetamine
-Quantity
seized
(count)
MDMA,MDA,
MDEA -
Quantity
seized
(tablets)
MDMA,
MDA,
MDEA -
Quantit
y seized
(kg)
MDMA,
MDA,
MDEA -
Quantity
seized
(count)
EU, Türkiye
and Norway
7971
22756
333079
104805
16199
40970
32047
74528
15867422
4177
30078
Table 7. Seizures data (European Drug Report 2026) (continued)
Country
Cannabis
resin -
Quantity
seized (kg)
Cannabis
resin -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Herbal
cannabis -
Quantity
seized (kg)
Herbal
cannabis -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Cannabi
s oil -
Quantit
y seized
(kg)
Canna
bis oil
-
Quant
ity
seized
(litre)
Cannabi
s oil -
Quantit
y seized
(count)
Cannabis
plants -
Quantity
seized (plants)
Cannabis
plants -
Quantity
seized
(kg)
Cannabis
plants -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Belgium
711
17
9983
886
155.5
–
21
-
–
-
Bulgaria
5
56
10759
3332
-
–
-
34558
20555
363
Czechia
126
114
621
7421
-
-
-
7599
–
357
Denmark
3315
14751
522
1395
-
4
56
-
-
-
Germany
5004
-
19362
-
-
–
-
108255
–
-
Estonia
2
43
102
660
-
–
-
-
16
17
Ireland
171
374
2916
6118
-
–
-
<1
–
315
Greece
218
904
5216
9447
3
–
31
52271
–
456
Spain
205991
198666
48466
115295
51
–
189
1601532
–
2229
France
64700
-
36300
-
-
–
-
67607
–
-
Croatia
76
500
2082
6485
-
–
-
14954
–
140
Italy
17333
10900
28752
4876
14
3
45
154819
–
625
Cyprus
2
31
617
814
-
–
-
14
–
6
Latvia
186
102
158
1039
-
–
-
-
155
31
Lithuania
410
157
231
2067
-
<1
-
-
–
-
Luxembourg
41
508
57
209
-
–
-
11
–
2
Hungary
34
121
605
2762
-
–
-
3926
–
152
Malta
4315.7
20
214
88
-
–
-
244
–
10
Netherlands
255
710
14492
7397
-
–
-
-
–
-
Austria
1745
2030
2370
13587
6
–
80
40101
–
334
Poland
1635
809
7058
20222
-
–
-
18130
–
732
Portugal
7344
4446
1845
798
357.3
8
8
2635
–
143
Romania
43
285
861
3529
-
<1
1
-
477
67
Slovenia
1.29
64
564
2714
-
–
-
14563
1
121
Slovakia
<1
26
123
733
-
–
-
210
–
5
Finland
274
248
1668
988
-
–
-
10373
–
1171
Sweden
7273
15973
2652
6071
17
2
640
-
–
-
- 23 -

Country
Cannabis
resin -
Quantity
seized (kg)
Cannabis
resin -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Herbal
cannabis -
Quantity
seized (kg)
Herbal
cannabis -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Cannabi
s oil -
Quantit
y seized
(kg)
Canna
bis oilQuant
ity
seized
(litre)
Cannabi
s oil -
Quantit
y seized
(count)
Cannabis
plants -
Quantity
seized (plants)
Cannabis
plants -
Quantity
seized
(kg)
Cannabis
plants -
Quantity
seized
(count)
Türkiye
13751
17405
47710
80420
-
39
76
108378999
–
6091
Norway
2591
5939
1087
2345
<1
5
114
-
–
-
European
Union
321211
251855
198596
218933
604.9
18
1071
2131802
21204
7276
EU, Türkiye
and Norway
337553
275199
247393
301698
605.1
62
1261
110510801
21204
13367
Notes
All data are for 2024 or the most recent year and are rounded off to the most significant figures.
France: The figure for amphetamine seizures, 618 kilograms, includes both amphetamine and methamphetamine.
Netherlands: In 2024, the data concern seizures by Dutch Customs only. No data on seizures by the police are available. As a result,
these figures provide only a partial picture of the total number of seizures. Since 2017, the data represent a minimum amount,
therefore seizures data are incomplete.
Amphetamine (including captagon) and methamphetamine tablets were converted to mass-equivalents by assuming a mass of 0.25
grams per tablet. 
Methamphetamine: methamphetamine/methylamphetamine. 
 
The data used to create these tables may be found in CSV (comma-separated values) format below.
This PDF was generated automatically on 9/06/2026 from the web page located at this address:
https://www.euda.europa.eu/publications/european-drug-report/2026/annex-tables_en. Some errors may have occurred
during this process. For the authoritative and most recent version, we recommend consulting the web page.
- 24 -