1 
 
 
 
 
The situation regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and responses to it continues to evolve rapidly. 
Regular updates are provided by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and 
the World Health Organization, and in most countries national public health guidelines are 
available. The EMCDDA has created a COVID-19 resource hub that provides access to up-todate materials on drugs and COVID-19-related issues. 
 
Since 2019, the EMCDDA has enhanced cooperation with the European Neighbourhood Policy 
partners (1) within the framework of the EU4Monitoring Drugs (EU4MD) project funded by the European 
Union. The project supports national and regional readiness to identify and respond to drug-related 
security and health threats. 
 
 
 
 
(1) Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Egypt, Georgia, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Moldova, Morocco, Palestine*, Tunisia and 
Ukraine 
*This designation shall not be construed as recognition of a State of Palestine and is without prejudice to the individual positions of the 
Member States on this issue. 
EMCDDA trendspotter briefing 
September 2020 
Impact of COVID-19 on drug markets, drug use, 
drug-related harms and responses in east 
European Neighbourhood Policy countries 

 
2 
 
Summary 
Since the beginning of 2020, the world has been experiencing an unprecedented public health emergency 
caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has led to the progressive introduction of 
social distancing and other control measures by national governments. To investigate the effects of the 
pandemic on and the implications for drug markets, drug services and people who use drugs in the 
European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) countries, the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug 
Addiction (EMCDDA) launched a trendspotter study. This briefing provides a snapshot of the state of play 
with respect to the impact of COVID-19 on drug markets, drug services and people who use drugs in east 
ENP countries (2) between March and May 2020. 
How have drug markets changed? 
§ 
The study suggests that, following the introduction of COVID-19-related confinement measures, drug 
markets across the region contracted to a small to moderate extent, with disruptions in supply chains 
evidenced by a reduction in the volume and number of seizures at borders and increases in retaillevel prices for certain types of drugs in some countries. 
§ 
There are indications that this market disruption may have prompted the resurgence of small-scale 
(home) production of amphetamines in some countries. 
§ 
At the retail level, contactless drug dealing activities have prevailed. These are likely to have been 
prompted by the introduction of national restrictions on movement, heightened public order 
measures and strategies to limit COVID-19 by restricting person-to-person contact. 
§ 
At the same time, law enforcement activities have also been affected in various ways, and a decline 
in the number of drug law offences reported may reflect temporary changes in national priorities, 
with the focus for policing priorities shifting during this period towards ensuring public safety and 
order. 
What has been the impact on drug use, drug-related harms and drug-related health 
services? 
§ 
Cannabis use appears to have been least affected, but with divergent patterns noted between those 
who use cannabis recreationally and more frequent users. 
§ 
Several sources suggest that the availability of the majority of illicit substances smuggled across 
borders into the region, such as heroin, MDMA, amphetamines and cocaine, has decreased, which 
is thought to have led to a reduction in use of these substances although this is difficult to empirically 
substantiate at this time. 
§ 
Localised heroin shortages may have contributed to increased demand for treatment: an increase in 
attempts to access opioid substitution treatment (OST) services and an observed increase in the 
demand for drug treatment in general. 
§ 
The reduction in availability of some established illicit drugs in some contexts appear to have 
resulted in an increased use of licit substitutes, such as alcohol, or the misuse of pharmaceuticals, 
including OST medications, or other psychotropic pharmaceutical substances, frequently used in 
combination with illicit substances. 
§ 
There was an overall reduction in health service provision during the initial phases of national 
confinement measures, impacting on most healthcare services not related to COVID-19 treatment. 
 
(2) Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine 

 
3 
 
As a result, it appears that people who use drugs may have experienced a decrease in the 
availability of and had less access to their usual drug-related services. In some countries, the entry 
of new clients to drug treatment services, particularly OST services, and access to testing for bloodborne infections were also limited. 
§ 
Both national health services and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) involved in the delivery of 
needle and syringe provisions implemented adaptations to their service models, with remote and 
mobile services being provided where this was possible. 
§ 
Most countries in the region have rapidly adapted practices to provide take-home OST medications, 
ensuring the uninterrupted delivery of treatment. In Ukraine, an increased demand for methadone 
through private practitioners was observed. Advocates for people who use drugs have welcomed the 
new practices of national programmes, although some reports suggest a need for the closer 
monitoring of adherence to take-home OST dosing, as well as of the need to support the work of 
private practitioners. 
What are the possible long-term impacts of COVID-19 on drug markets, drug 
services and people who use drugs in the east ENP region? 
§ 
Findings of this study and similar studies in Europe and the region suggest that, once the borders 
reopen, it will be necessary to remain vigilant about the developments in the activities of criminal 
networks and distribution methods (surface and darknet markets, encrypted communication, face-toface delivery) (EMCDDA and Europol, 2020). This should also be reflected in the strategies of 
competent authorities and experts calls for more to be invested in staff training, to ensure that staff 
are prepared to respond to any new business models developing within the drug market. 
§ 
In terms of drug use, the long-term impacts of COVID-19 and the subsequent relaxation of lockdown 
measures remain to be seen. The situation requires ongoing monitoring given reports of the reduced 
availability and use of some drugs such as heroin and cocaine, combined with the emergence of the 
home-based production of amphetamines in some countries and the increased use of other, more 
readily available, psychoactive substances. 
§ 
National authorities and service providers may need to consider how to maintain innovative 
approaches, such as online consultations and psychological support, take-home OST dosing and 
remote services, to reduce drug-related harm, as this may be essential for attracting and retaining 
those in need of drug-related services. At the same time, health services may continue to experience 
an additional burden of maintaining the safety of both clients and healthcare providers until an 
effective treatment for COVID-19 or a suitable vaccine against the virus responsible emerges. 
 
 

 
4 
 
Introduction 
In response to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments in east ENP countries have one by 
one, since mid-March 2020, implemented a range of confinement measures aimed at reducing the spread of 
the virus among their general populations (Figure 1). 
 
FIGURE 1 
Introduction of COVID-19-related national confinement measures in the east ENP region in early 2020 
 
Source: ACAPS (https://www.acaps.org/; accessed on 26 June 2020). 
 
Concerns and questions about how national COVID-19 response measures would affect drug markets and 
people who use drugs, and how drug services would be able to meet the needs of their clients arose in the 
first weeks of the pandemic. Furthermore, anecdotal information began to emerge about changes and 
adaptations in drug use patterns and behaviours. 
To gain insights into the impact of COVID-19 on drug supply and drug markets, drug use, drug-related harms 
and drug services in the ENP countries, the EMCDDA initiated an investigative rapid assessment using the 

 
5 
 
agency’s trendspotter methodology (EMCDDA, 2018). This study was initiated in April 2020 and has two 
parts. One part focused on east ENP countries (3) and the other on south ENP countries (4). 
When focusing on the possible changes in drug markets and drug supply in the east ENP countries, it is 
important to highlight that these countries are located along well-established routes for drug smuggling to the 
EU, the most well-known being the route used for heroin trafficking. At the same time, they also represent a 
relatively large market of consumers of drugs produced in the EU and provide a transit route for drugs 
originating in or transiting through the EU towards other regions in the east. 
Traditionally, apart from cannabis, the main drugs of use in the east ENP countries have been opium-based 
products and home-produced amphetamine-type stimulants. However, in recent years, the use of new 
psychoactive substances has been increasingly reported among a wide range of populations, including 
among people who inject drugs. Furthermore, polysubstance use is a common phenomenon among people 
who inject drugs. (EMCDDA, forthcoming). 
Injecting drug use in the region, which is well above the global rate of 0.33 % (UNODC, 2019), continues to 
fuel ongoing transmission of HIV and other infections caused by blood-borne viruses in many partner 
countries. For example, the prevalence of HIV among people who inject drugs is estimated to be as high as 
30.8 % and 22.6 % in Belarus and Ukraine, respectively (UNAIDS, 2019). 
In general, drug-related services, such as drug treatment and harm reduction programmes, in the east ENP 
countries have been established and are operational. OST and needle and syringe programmes are 
available in all east ENP countries; however, the coverage of these services is highly variable. Many of them 
are still funded by external donors or are delivered under the frameworks of national HIV/AIDS programmes. 
Within this context, these programmes and interventions were designed to target people who inject drugs, 
while services and programmes for people who use other psychoactive substances or require long-term 
residential treatment often remain underdeveloped. 
The trendspotter methodology 
The trendspotter methodology is based on the triangulation of a range of rapid investigative approaches and 
data collection from multiple qualitative and quantitative sources with a systematic analysis incorporating 
expert opinion (EMCDDA, 2018). Specifically, for studies on the impact of COVID-19 in Europe and the ENP 
area, the methodology was adapted to suit online investigation, considering the national emergency 
restrictions on both the EMCDDA team and the study participants (EMCDDA, 2020); however, the three 
main phases of the study methodology were retained (Figure 2). 
For this online briefing, the results of the following data collection exercises have been brought together in 
the analysis: 
§ 
a search of peer-reviewed articles (5) published on the topic of coronavirus and illicit drugs in 
international peer-reviewed journals and open source monitoring for relevant reports on the internet; 
§ 
two online surveys on drug-related health and security: the health survey was sent to the 
EU4Monitoring Drugs (EU4MD) project national contact points and a network of health experts 
(n = 19); the survey on drug-related security was disseminated through the EU4MD national contact 
points. In total, seven responses to the health survey and five to the security survey were received 
 
(3) Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine. 
(4) Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Palestine and Tunisia. 
(5) No articles on the topic of COVID-19/coronavirus and illicit drugs and east ENP partners were available in peer-reviewed publications 
by 7 May 2020. 

 
6 
 
from the east ENP countries (the surveys were in English, and responses in English, Russian and 
French were accepted); 
§ 
the European Web Survey on Drugs: COVID-19 (EWSD-COVID), available in 21 languages, 
including Russian and French, targeting adults aged 18 years and over with experience of illicit drug 
use, aimed at gathering information on changes in drug consumption behaviours in ENP partner 
countries due to COVID-19 (see Box 1); 
§ 
a virtually facilitated group of five security and nine health experts, drug professionals, service 
providers, and representatives of NGOs and networks of people who use drugs from the east ENP 
countries. 
For any literature-based results presented, references are cited; other findings are based on the sources 
described above. 
 
FIGURE 2 
Online trendspotter methodology 
 
 
 

 
7 
 
 
Box 1: The European Web Survey on Drugs — impact of COVID-19 on patterns of use for ENP 
partner countries 
 
The EMCDDA European Web Survey on Drugs: COVID-19 (EWSD-COVID) was disseminated in 
the ENP partner countries. It aimed to collect information on experiences and perspectives from 
people who use drugs in relation to the impact of COVID-19-related restrictions. A total of 111 
respondents residing in the ENP region completed the online questionnaire (with around 30 
questions) in one of the 21 languages, including Russian and French, made available between 
8 April and 25 May 2020. 
Respondents from Ukraine accounted for 86 % of the sample. In the absence of appropriate 
sampling frames covering all people who use drugs, this method relies on self-selected samples, 
which limits generalisability and introduces the potential for multiple responses and unknown biases; 
these limitations need to be borne in mind when considering the results presented here. 
While web surveys are not representative of the general population of people who use drugs, when 
carefully conducted, they can provide a timely and more detailed picture of the behaviour of groups 
of drug users who are often difficult to access by other means. This survey therefore contributes to 
the overall analysis of the situation and of the changes associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and 
its consequences. However, follow-up and triangulation with other data sources will be required to 
increase confidence that the findings are applicable to wider patterns of drug use in the ENP region. 
Overall, the average age of the EWSD-COVID respondents from ENP countries was 31 years, and 
half were male. Around 89 % of all respondents and 97 % of the sample from Ukraine reported 
some level of illicit drug use in the last year, and only this sample has been included in the analysis 
presented in this briefing. Almost 84 % of the sample reported use of some form of cannabis product 
in the 30 days prior to responding to the survey, while use of other drugs in the same period was 
less common: ecstasy/MDMA (39 % of the sample), amphetamines (31 %), LSD (lysergic acid 
diethylamide) (20 %), non-prescribed opioids other than heroin (16 %), synthetic cannabinoids 
(9 %), synthetic cathinones (6 %), cocaine (4 %) and heroin (3 %). 
 
 
Presentation and interpretation of the results 
The data collected in this study were analysed using three broad, but closely related, topics: the impact of 
the COVID-19 pandemic on drug markets and drug supply, the impact on drug use and drug-related harms, 
and the impact on drug-related health services. Results, as presented below, are guided by research 
questions and are structured loosely by themes emerging from the analysis. Several important issues need 
to be taken into account when considering these results. 
First, any generalisations from the findings should be made only with caution. It is important to note that 
national drug monitoring systems in east ENP countries are nascent and therefore there is a paucity of 
routine monitoring data on the security and health aspects of the drugs phenomenon from official sources. 
The data presented in this report were derived from a relatively small number of survey respondents, such 
as national experts, as well as a modest non-representative sample of people who use drugs. Furthermore, 
respondents to the EWSD-COVID may represent a specific population of people who use drugs who are 
computer literate, and this may not be the case for larger populations of problematic users. 

 
8 
 
Nevertheless, despite the abovementioned limitations of the study, many of the findings are corroborated by 
similar findings in other recent studies, which have been referred to throughout the text. The findings provide 
informative insights into drug markets, drug use and drug-related harms, as well as drug services, in the era 
of COVID-19, and hence could be useful for policymakers and programme managers. 
What were the main changes in drug markets and drug supply 
after the emergence of COVID-19? 
Production — domestic products may have gained importance 
It appears that drug production in the ENP countries is mainly focused on herbal cannabis and 
amphetamines, with local markets being the main targets for the distribution. The domestic production of 
cannabis is present in all partner countries, but heterogenous in respect to the volumes produced and 
production patterns. Some law enforcement experts were of the opinion that the local production of herbal 
cannabis may have been on the rise; however, this study did not find any substantive evidence to confirm 
this suggestion. 
Amphetamines remain one of the most commonly produced synthetic illicit substances in the region 
(EMCDDA, 2016; UNODC, 2020b). However, the technologies as well as the precursors used in the 
manufacturing process vary from country to country, as does the scale of production. Anecdotal reports of a 
deficit in some precursors were observed in the initial stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, 
according to lead law enforcement experts in the region, this situation did not last long, as traffickers found 
new ways to obtain the precursor chemicals necessary for production relatively quickly. This is similar to the 
situation seen in the major synthetic production hubs in Europe (EMCDDA and Europol, 2020). On the other 
hand, there are indications that some users may have returned to the home-based production of stimulants, 
such as the production of a substance known locally as ‘vint’ in Ukraine or an amphetamine-type stimulant 
derived from locally grown ephedra plants in Georgia (Otiashvili et al., 2017). However, the scale of this 
activity, as well as its potential to significantly affect local markets, remains unknown. This area therefore 
may be important for subsequent follow-up activities. 
Trafficking — no signs of major disruptions 
Closing the borders and more enforcement of security measures by all countries in the region may have had 
an impact on the modus operandi of organised crime groups (OCGs) involved in drugs trafficking, with a 
direct consequence being smaller volumes of drugs being trafficked across borders. There are also signs 
that the ‘business’ did not stop during the pandemic but rather adapted to the new reality, with more targeting 
of people who transport licit goods and shifts towards using online environments and methods of distribution 
that avoid physical contact. 
A recent assessment of the impact of COVID-19 prevention measures on EU drug markets suggested that, 
at least in the initial months, the pandemic had little impact on the trafficking of drugs across EU borders 
(EMCDDA and Europol, 2020). Some law enforcement experts across the east ENP region reported a 
decrease in the volume and number of seizures of illicit drugs smuggled from abroad, indicating that this is 
likely to be the result of travel restrictions for passengers and bans on the movement across the borders of 
non-essential goods. 
This study examined possible impacts of national restrictions, implemented by governments, on the 
operation of the northern drug trafficking route towards EU. Like other similar analysis (EMCDDA and 
Europol, 2020), it did not find compelling evidence of major disruptions to the operations of OCGs using this 
route. As reported by earlier studies, it remains clear that operations along this route did not cease as a 
result of national lockdowns. 

 
9 
 
§ 
Azerbaijan and Georgia, as well as neighbouring Iran, continued to report in March and April 2020 
large-volume seizures of opium and heroin originating from Afghanistan (CARICC, 2020a-h; 
Dumbadze, 2020); 
§ 
law enforcement officers from Armenia and Moldova indicated that OCGs may have adapted their 
modus operandi by exploiting their involvement in cross-border shipment activities whose operations 
had not been affected, such as lorry drivers transporting licit goods. 
Distribution — online and contactless modes in the spotlight 
The EMCDDA-Europol update on EU drug markets indicated that drug distribution using post and parcel 
services may have increased in some EU countries during the pandemic (EMCDDA and Europol, 2020). 
This mode of delivery frequently goes hand in hand with purchasing illicit drugs online. The results from the 
current trendspotter study are inconclusive on whether or not purchasing illicit substances on online 
platforms, mobile applications or darknet markets has become more frequent among people who use drugs 
in the east ENP region. 
§ 
A small number of law enforcement experts expressed the view that drug sales using online 
technologies increased in importance during the lockdown. 
§ 
In Armenia, for example, the number of international mail parcels containing illicit substances seized 
increased after the introduction of COVID-19-related restrictions, even though there was a decline in 
the overall number of international postal shipments. 
§ 
The monitoring of the main online market for illicit drug sales in Georgia — Matanga — indicated that 
vendors, offers, numbers of daily transactions and values of sales, in comparison with March, 
dropped in April and remained the same in May (Figure 3). 
§ 
Data from Ukraine indicated that number of detected drug sales on darknet markets in the first few 
months of 2020 was substantially higher that the number of detected drug sales for the same period 
in 2019. However, almost half of EWSD-COVID respondents from Ukraine reported no change in the 
way in which they had obtained illicit substances, with only a small number indicating that they had 
purchased illicit drugs online and on the darknet more often than they had before the COVID-19 
pandemic. 
 
Contactless purchases or drug drops, also known as ‘dead drops’, are a well-established method for streetlevel dealing in a number of east ENP countries, including Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine. This method aims 
to minimise physical contact between dealers and buyers, and thus reduce the risk of arrest (Box 2). It has 
been documented that, with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and related prevention measures, this 
modus operandi gained popularity in Europe (EMCDDA and Europol, 2020). It is possible that this form of 
distribution may also have become more prominent in the ENP countries after the emergence of COVID-19. 
Further analyses of EWSD-COVID data indicate that avoiding ‘face to face contacts’ while obtaining drugs is 
an adaptation strategy used by about 10 % of the sample. 
 
 
 

 
10 
 
 
Box 2: Drug drops or ‘dead drops’ 
This distribution method involves the buyer transferring funds to the seller, after which the drugs are 
deposited in a hiding place and the coordinates and a description of this hiding place are sent to the buyer 
so they can be retrieved. Frequently, cryptocurrencies and encrypted communication channels are used, 
such as Telegram, Wickr, Signal, etc. (EMCDDA and Europol, 2020). 
 
 
FIGURE 3 
Activity of Matanga darknet market in Georgia: number of vendors, offers and daily transactions, and 
the daily values of sales from 25 March to 31 May 2020 
 
 
Source: Data from an on-going study entitled ‘COVID-19 impact on drug markets and users’ behavior in 
Ukraine and Georgia’, Alternative Georgia. 

 
11 
 
This, however, may be a temporary response to heightened drug law enforcement operations. In Ukraine, 
people who use drugs indicated experiencing increased law enforcement activity (INPUD, 2020), and data 
from the Ministry of Internal Affairs indicate an increase in seizures in the first 4 months of 2020 compared 
with the same period of 2019. In Georgia, ‘dead drop’ activity relocated from central parts of Tbilisi to 
neighbourhoods where the law enforcement presence and controls were not so stringent. On the other hand, 
the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Republic of Moldova reported that the number of drug-related offences 
(production, trafficking, distribution, possession of drugs) had significantly decreased when compared with 
the same period in 2019 (Figure 4). This may indicate that the operations of dealers and criminal groups had 
become more discrete, as well as a shift in law enforcement priorities towards enforcing heightened public 
order measures during the emergency situation. 
 
FIGURE 4 
Drug law offences (crimes) in the Republic of Moldova, January to April 2019 and 2020 
 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs of Republic of Moldova. 
Availability — decline in availability of some drugs may have fuelled a surge in 
prices 
As reported in other studies, COVID-19-related confinement measures initially had a negative effect on the 
availability of all illicit drugs, determined by temporary disruptions to global drug supply chains, due to border 
closures, or to street-level supply, as a result of restricted movement and the increased presence of law 
enforcement officers (EMCDDA and Europol, 2020, UNODC, 2020a). Experts from Georgia, for example, 
reported that the availability of all drugs was affected adversely during the first weeks of the lockdown, while 
in Moldova less cocaine, heroin, MDMA and amphetamine were seen on the market. The neighbouring 
Ukraine also saw less cocaine and MDMA, but reported a slight increase in amphetamines and new 
psychoactive substances. 
This limited availability may also be reflected in the increase in prices at wholesale and retail levels. Data 
from Georgian authorities indicate that the prices of some drugs almost doubled from October 2019 to March 
2020, as can be seen in Figure 5. This could reflect the situation in the region as a whole, but should be 
interpreted with caution in terms of the applicability to the other countries, since the situation differs from 
country to country (Figure 6). The increase in heroin and cocaine prices could be explained by the fact that 

 
12 
 
these drugs are imported into the countries of the region and this process may have become more difficult as 
a result of the confinement measures. These data are partially corroborated by people who use drugs, as, 
although almost half of the EWSD-COVID respondents reported no change in prices after the onset of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, around 15 % of respondents, mainly those who reported using cannabis, MDMA, LSD 
or amphetamines in the past 30 days, indicated that prices had increased since the outbreak of COVID-19. 
 
FIGURE 5 
Evolution of drug prices at retail (street) level in Georgia from October 2019 to March 2020 
 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia. 
 
The study provided only limited data about the purity of substances (Figure 6). 
 
 

 
13 
 
FIGURE 6 
Changes in drug prices and purities in selected countries during initial months of COVID-19 
pandemic 
 
Source: A survey among national law enforcement experts (submitted by Armenia (06.05.2020), Georgia 
(11.05.2020), Republic of Moldova (24.04.2020) and Ukraine (08.05.2020)). 
How has COVID-19 affected drug use? 
Alterations or disruptions to drug markets and drug supply may also change the drug use patterns and 
practices of people who use drugs. In Europe, the combination of COVID-19 control measures, such as 
restrictions on movement, the closure of entertainment venues and bans on public gatherings, and a decline 
in access to the sellers of some substances contributed to some reduction in illicit drug consumption during 
the early period of the COVID-19 pandemic (EMCDDA, 2020). 
Overall, the east ENP countries have only limited monitoring tools in place to rapidly assess drug use 
patterns at national levels. The data available from the region originate from small non-representative 
samples of people who use drugs or expert opinions. However, when considered along with the results of 
similar analyses from across the world and data derived from drug market analyses, they shed light on a 
diverse picture of changes in drug use patterns in the initial phases of the COVID-19 pandemic among 
different populations. 
Expert opinions highlight that the decreased availability of some well-established illicit substances soon after 
the introduction of COVID-19 control measures has led to changes in drug use habits, more erratic 
behaviours and changes in choices of drugs. The EWSD-COVID data from Ukraine indicate that nearly a 
quarter of people who use drugs in this sample did not change their drug use habits, while three out of 10 
indicated using fewer drugs and one in 10 reported stopping drug use following the emergence of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Respondents provided diverse explanations for reductions in drug use, with the most 
cited reasons being fewer social opportunities, constraints on living arrangements and loss of income/less 
money to buy drugs. Health concerns, financial uncertainty and reduced ability to buy and collect drugs have 
been also mentioned. On the other hand, one in five participants of the EWSD-COVID in Ukraine reported 
increasing their drug use during the period under study, with reasons reported being boredom, anxiety, to 

 
14 
 
help them cope with COVID-19 and because they had stockpiled drugs. A small proportion of respondents 
were unable to assess a change in their illicit drug use pattern since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Overall, our findings on drug use patterns are similar to those that emerged from the EWSD-COVID data 
from the EU countries (EMCDDA, 2020). 
 
FIGURE 7 
EWSD-COVID respondents in Ukraine reporting how their use of drugs changed after the 
implementation of COVID-19 containment measures 
 
Note: The percentages calculated for those who reported the use of one of the following substances in the 
past 12 months were based on the following numbers: 82 persons who used cannabis, 68 who used 
MDMA,44 who used amphetamines and 42 who used LSD. 
Cannabis — increased for some, decreased for others, but general trend remains 
stable 
Overall, cannabis use patterns have remained relatively stable. 
§ 
Reports from Moldova indicate that cannabis use increased in the initial months of the COVID19 pandemic, while data from Georgia suggest some decrease in use during the initial weeks of 
the pandemic, mainly attributed to strict confinement measures and an overnight curfew. 
§ 
Compared with other illicit drugs in Ukraine, a higher proportion of web survey respondents 
reported using cannabis more frequently and in greater quantities during the confinement period 
(Figure 6). It is likely that some of those who had used cannabis frequently prior to the COVID19 pandemic maintained or even increased their use, while those who had used cannabis less 
often, in a more recreational way, were more likely to have discontinued its use. These 
observations are consistent with the EWSD-COVID findings for the EU (EMCDDA, 2020). 
§ 
One in 10 respondents of the EWSD-COVID in Ukraine who had used cannabis in the study 
period reported buying larger quantities of illicit drugs, which may indicate stockpiling. 

 
15 
 
Nevertheless, there is insufficient information to determine if this led to greater or more frequent 
use. 
Synthetic stimulants — divergent trends and possible emergence of home-based 
production 
Data on synthetic stimulant use are very divergent across the region and reflect the established use 
behaviour in certain user groups and diversity in the choice of products resulting from domestic production, 
meaning that these substances were relatively easy to access during the initial stages of the COVID-19 
pandemic. 
§ 
There are indications of declines in amphetamine use among some groups, although experts in 
Georgia and Ukraine reported an increase in the consumption of home-based amphetaminetype stimulants (6). 
§ 
An expert reported that, in Azerbaijan, some users of pharmaceutical drugs, such as tramadol or 
pregabalin (Lyrica ®), have reported switching to the use of methamphetamine because of the 
closure of pharmacies and the reduction in their opening hours during the pandemic. 
§ 
In Georgia and Ukraine, the use of new psychoactive substances, such as synthetic cathinones 
and synthetic cannabinoids, may have declined in the initial phases of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This is supported by reports from Estonia indicating a decline in the supply of alpha-PVP (alphapyrrolidinopentiophenone, a synthetic cathinone) (EMCDDA, 2020). 
MDMA use is mostly associated with recreational settings and the night-time economy, which has been 
seriously affected by the national measures to limit the spread of COVID-19. A ban on social gatherings and 
the closure of venues was reported across the region, except in Belarus, from the first days of pandemic: 
§ 
several sources used for this study point to a likely reduction in MDMA use across the region, 
which is also consistent with the observations for the EU (EMCDDA, 2020); 
§ 
data from experts and targeted studies indicate that some MDMA users may have discontinued 
use, while others may have opted for alternatives, such as LSD (e.g. Georgia) or ketamine (e.g. 
Georgia and Ukraine). 
Opioids — some decline in heroin availability may have driven an increase in 
demand for opioid substitution treatment 
National experts indicated that heroin use is likely to have reduced in the initial period of the COVID-19 
pandemic in most of the countries studied as a result of the low availability of the drug. This has created 
certain pressures on drug treatment services, which have witnessed an increase in demand for OST. 
Ongoing studies in Georgia and Ukraine indicate that there was a possible increase in the misuse of 
medicines used for OST within a month of the introduction of COVID-19 containment measures (Box 3.). 
 
 
 
 
(6) ‘Vint’ in Ukraine and stimulants based on the ephedra plant in Georgia. 

 
16 
 
Box 3. Should there be concerns about a potential diversion of opioid 
substitution treatment medicines? 
Following reports of a reduced availability of heroin in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
signals began to emerge suggesting an increased demand for OST in several countries (Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, Georgia and Ukraine). While most countries ensured continuous access to OST for those 
who were already enrolled in OST programmes prior to the onset of the pandemic, mainly through 
expanded take-home programmes, the initiation of treatment for new clients was halted or reduced 
because of limited national capacities. At the same time, there were indications that some of the people 
who experienced difficulties accessing their opioids of choice on the illicit market may have attempted to 
obtain OST medicines either through acquaintances enrolled in OST programmes or, as in case of 
Ukraine, through private practitioners. 
An increase in the misuse of methadone, either diverted from OST programmes or from private 
practitioners who can prescribe it for detoxification, has been reported by a study that is under way in 
Kyiv, Ukraine. A similar study in Tbilisi, Georgia, has also reported that a sample of people who use 
drugs had used methadone diverted from OST programmes since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
while the same sample did not report using diverted methadone in the 12 months prior the COVID-19 
pandemic (Figure 8). This is also consistent with reports from Georgian harm reduction services of a 
decrease in demand for 1-ml syringes, while requests have increased for larger volume instruments, of 
5, 10 and 20 ml, reportedly used for injecting methadone. 
These findings need to be interpreted with caution and in the context of the long-term presence of ‘street 
methadone’ (1) in some countries. For example, Ukraine reported illicit methadone seizures in 2019 as 
well as methadone-related deaths in 2018 (CMHMDA, 2019) and Ukrainian experts indicated that 
production of the illicit methadone has been on raise also in the beginning of the year. Close monitoring 
will be required in the coming months to assess the share of diverted OST in the illicit drug market, the 
possible long-term risk of diversion of OST medicines and the need to implement relevant risk reduction 
measures, such as introduce and monitor application of prescription guidelines and good practices that 
balance potential harms with the well-documented public health benefits of OST. 
 
 
(1) Street methadone in this context refers to an illicitly produced substance that is called ‘methadone’ by people who use drugs and 
that is available on the illicit market in many former Soviet Union countries. It comes as a powder and is injected and is sometimes 
also referred to as ‘crystal methadone’. 
 
 

 
17 
 
FIGURE 8 
Trends in use of street methadone and buprenorphine-based products and misuse of methadone 
and buprenorphine-based medicines among two cohorts of people who use drugs in Kyiv, Ukraine, 
and Georgia, April-June 2020 
 
Source: Data from an ongoing study entitled ‘COVID-19 impact on drug markets and users’ behavior in 
Ukraine and Georgia’, Ukrainian Institute of Public Health and Policy and Alternative Georgia. The question 
asked in the survey was ‘Indicate which substance did you use during the past 14 days without doctor’s 
prescription and by what route’. 
Other psychoactive substances — use as replacements for or to enhance effects of 
illicit drugs 
The study highlights that people who use drugs may have increased their consumption of alcohol and 
pharmaceutical drugs with psychotropic effects (e.g. muscle relaxants (7), sedatives) during the pandemic in 
the absence of their main drug of choice or in addition to a reduced amount of their main substance of choice 
due to decreased availability. The Eurasian Harm Reduction Association (EHRA) also observed that, as 
access to some substances became more difficult, people who use drugs resorted to using other substances 
that they were able to obtain, including various prescription drugs mixed with alcohol (EHRN, 2020). 
 
 
(7) A group of chemical compounds used to relax the skeletal muscles. 

 
18 
 
What has been the impact of COVID-19 on the occurrence of 
drug-related harms and what are the other health and social 
consequences? 
Unsafe injecting practices are a well-documented risk factor for the transmission of blood-borne viruses such 
as HIV and the hepatitis viruses among people who inject drugs. While somewhat limited information 
emerged from the surveys in terms of the impact of COVID-19 on drug-related harms and other health and 
social consequences, reports from Georgia and Ukraine indicated that some risky injecting practices, such 
as the sharing of substances and injection equipment among users, may have increased during the early 
phase of the pandemic. This was reportedly because, following the introduction of COVID-19-related 
confinement measures, it became more difficult to acquire and distribute clean injecting equipment. Experts 
from Georgia shared examples of people who use drugs helping each other to find clean equipment and/or 
sharing clean equipment, but also sometimes illicit substances, at times free of charge. In addition, the study 
found evidence for a reduced uptake of testing for blood-borne viruses in some countries. 
Information about the impact of COVID-19 on the occurrence of fatal and non-fatal drug-related overdoses 
was not available at the time of the study. However, drug professionals who participated in the study 
expressed concerns that the illicit use of methadone, as well as the supplementing of illicit drugs with 
sedatives or new psychoactive substances, could have contributed to a higher risk of overdose. To address 
this possibility, experts in Ukraine reported that efforts were made to increase naloxone availability at the 
community level. The prevention of overdose as well as the provision of advice on the reduction of harms 
associated with the use of NPS are pertinent among people who use drugs, as also reported by respondents 
of the EHRA study (EHRA, 2020). 
What has been the main impact of COVID-19 on the delivery of 
drug-related health services and how have these services 
adapted to the emergency? 
The coronavirus pandemic is reported to have affected both the availability of and the demand for drugrelated services. One of the leading experts in the region noted that the emergence of COVID-19 was a 
‘catalyser of change for development and innovation’ in drug-related services where there was a perceived 
need. From one side, the introduction of restrictions, in terms of the movement of people, physical distancing 
measures, the unavailability of public transport and policies to limit non-emergency care, have resulted in a 
decrease in the availability of and access to services. At the same time, some adaptations took place within 
a matter of days to ensure uninterrupted treatment and care for people who use drugs. 
These results are corroborated by findings from a recent survey of 222 people who use drugs from 50 
countries, implemented by the International Network of People Who Use Drugs (INPUD). This study also 
found that access to harm reduction services had decreased and that some government-run services had 
been closed completely because of COVID-19. In some countries, such as Belarus, INPUD reports that the 
only drug services that remained operational and accessible were those run by NGOs and peers (INPUD, 
2020). 
 

 
19 
 
Opioid substitution treatment — increase in demand and upscaling of take-home 
doses 
§ 
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia and Ukraine witnessed an increase in OST demand in 
the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, probably resulting from a combination of: a 
reduction or absence of heroin on the market; changes in OST delivery modalities that made 
services more accessible; and the loss of income of drug users. 
§ 
Armenia, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine put in place appropriate actions in the first weeks of the 
pandemic to either scale up the distribution of take-home OST medicines or implement a takehome OST provision for the first time (EHRA, 2020). The take-home doses ranged from 5 to 10 
days’ supply. This may have also contributed to improved treatment adherence among clients. 
§ 
In Ukraine, the Alliance of Public Health reported that more than 95 % of almost 13 000 OST 
clients were receiving up to 10 days’ take-home medication by the end of March. This was 
complemented by psycho-social support provided remotely via Skype, Viber or phone. 
§ 
At the same time, many countries had to cease accepting new clients for national OST 
programmes, mainly because of the existing ceiling in the number of treatment places in OST 
programmes or shortages of medicines. 
§ 
The Ministry of Health and service providers in Moldova reported having difficulties importing 
OST medication from an Italian-based producer. Extra efforts were made by national authorities, 
international organisations and partners in neighbouring countries to import the treatment 
supplies needed from Ukraine. 
Telemedicine, and ‘remote’ and contactless services — a new development for 
many drug-related health services 
When physical access to services was limited and to ensure social distancing and comply with ‘stay at home’ 
requirements, most providers explored the use of one or more types of telemedicine or remote services, or 
introduced mobile services. For example, in Ukraine online consultations were organised through the 
national hotline on drug dependence issues as an alternative to face-to-face consultations. Postal or home 
deliveries were also used to ensure the uninterrupted supply of antiretroviral medications for the treatment of 
HIV infection; in this region, many of those infected with HIV are people who use drugs. 
Overcoming challenges and ensuring a safe environment for clients and staff 
Whether in a hospital or an outpatient clinic, or through low-threshold or harm reduction services, the safety 
and security of staff is crucial to protect not only health workers but also clients, many of whom are 
potentially vulnerable to infection with SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for COVID-19. At the time of the 
study, only a few cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection had been reported among people who use drugs in the 
east ENP countries. Overall, services adjusted quickly to the new situation; however, there have been 
numerous challenges. The lack of the human resources needed to continue to provide drug-related health 
services on the one hand, caused even by staff being unable to get to service locations, and the 
unavailability or scarcity of personal protective equipment (PPE) on the other hand have been experienced 
acutely in the region. Nevertheless, protective measures, sanitisers, disinfectants, gloves and masks had 
been put in place in services that continue to receive clients. Some services have relocated from within the 
healthcare premises to elsewhere. Health experts have also shared anecdotal details of cases when they 
had to address common misconceptions and beliefs related to the SARS-CoV-2 infection risk. 

 
20 
 
What is the outlook following COVID-19 for east ENP 
countries? 
After almost four months of the lockdown measures implemented by governments in the east ENP countries, 
these measures are gradually being relaxed by some countries, while other countries, such as Armenia, and 
Azerbaijan, maintain, as at end of July 2020, the strict control measures because of a resurgence in cases of 
COVID-19 in the population. 
As reported by this study as well as a Europe-wide trendspotter study (EMCDDA, 2020), COVID-19 control 
measures have affected, in different ways, the drug supply and drug markets, drug use and drug-related 
related harms, as well as access to and uptake of drug-related services. While countries have learned much 
during this unprecedented international public health emergency posed by SARS-CoV-2, many questions 
remain unanswered. Uncertainties exist about what the ‘new normal’ will look like after the reopening of 
national borders, shops, restaurants and the many other places where large numbers of people congregate, 
as well as how possible second waves of coronavirus infection could impact on drug supply, drug markets, 
drug use, drug-related harms and drug services. 
What will happen to drug markets in the east ENP region as 
countries emerge from the lockdown? 
As reported in this study, the impact of COVID-19 on drug markets in the east ENP countries may have 
resulted in fewer seizures and lower volumes of seizures, and drugs being more difficult to access, at least at 
the beginning of the pandemic, when lockdown measures were first introduced. Furthermore, disruptions to 
the supply of precursors seem to have remained timebound, as criminal groups quickly adapted to the new 
situation and adjusted their actions. 
What will happen to the quantity and weight of seizures, as well as the availability of precursors, when 
international borders reopen remains to be seen. Nevertheless, law enforcement experts considered it 
essential to strengthen border control in general as well as to control the illicit trafficking of precursors. 
There is some anticipation that, following a disruption in drug sales, an activation of criminal networks may 
be observed post COVID-19. Some changes in terms of the sale of drugs and distribution methods observed 
during the initial stages of the COVID-19 epidemic may continue to persist. Special attention should be paid 
to monitoring online and darknet markets. The law enforcement experts consulted in the region agreed upon 
the need to invest more in the training of drug law enforcement officers in investigating and countering 
darknet drug markets. In addition, the importance of relevant equipment and tools was highlighted by the 
countries. Finally, the role of enhanced cooperation between relevant agencies, including international 
cooperation, was viewed as critical because of the nature of the pandemic. 
How will COVID-19-related measures affect drug use, drugrelated harms and drug services in the short to medium term? 
Changes in patterns of drug use have emerged, as reported by this study: while the availability of some 
substances decreased during the early stages of the pandemic, there was an increase in the demand for and 
use of other illicit and licit substances. At the same time, some people who use drugs reported a reduction in 
drug use or discontinuing use altogether. It is possible that, following the opening of international borders, 
there will be an increase in the supply and availability of some substances. Such a scenario is of concern, as 
people who used drugs such as opioids less during the lockdown may be at an increased risk of drug-related 
overdose due to a decrease in their tolerance levels. Considering the limited access to harm reduction 

 
21 
 
services in most countries during the lockdown, coupled with the common practice of sharing injection 
equipment, there may be some increased risk of acquiring blood-borne viruses during this period. 
COVID-19 has certainly caused disruptions in the provision of drug-related services, while also providing an 
opportunity to innovate and develop new modes of service delivery. Service disruptions are of concern, as 
people who use drugs need services on an ongoing basis, as interruptions to access to services can lead to 
an increased risk of infectious diseases, as well as fatal and non-fatal overdoses, among many other harms. 
Some ‘lessons learned’ were reported by health service providers interviewed as part of this study. Perhaps 
the most important recommendation was for health services to ‘be prepared’ and have comprehensive drugrelated crisis management plans in place in case of a second wave of coronavirus. The east ENP countries 
already face challenges related to limited financial and human resources in healthcare; nonetheless, 
services were able to adapt and innovate quickly despite the novel situation. 
Some of these innovations, such as online consultations and psychological support, take-home medicines 
such as those used for OST, alternative approaches to the distribution of harm reduction equipment, social 
distancing and other measures such as a ‘quota’ for the maximum number of clients in a room at a given 
time and the distribution and use of PPE, may well become routine practice in some healthcare settings, at 
least until an effective treatment for COVID-19 or a vaccine against the virus that causes it becomes 
available. Ethical aspects may require careful consideration should the use of ‘remote’ and ‘online’ services 
continue as common service delivery approaches. Finally, the ongoing education, training and protection of 
healthcare staff and clients remain at the core of the COVID-19 response of drug-related health services. 
 
 
 

 
22 
 
References 
CARICC (Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre for Combating the Illicit Trafficking of 
Narcotic Drugs, Psychotropic Substances and their Precursors) (2020a), CARICC weekly summary — 
unofficial translation: 02.03-08.03.2020, 
https://caricc.org/index.php/en/publications/reports/item/download/1367_9b7ba73d09fd22d392f834f0d51e3a
f8, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
CARICC (2020b), CARICC weekly summary — unofficial translation: 09.03-15.03.2020, 
https://caricc.org/index.php/en/publications/reports/item/download/1372_044963a62e276a4677782545a018f
bad, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
CARICC (2020c), CARICC weekly summary — unofficial translation: 16.03-22.03.2020, 
https://caricc.org/index.php/en/publications/reports/item/download/1374_cd771c4833a8aa0c2f78d16bd5209
c3e, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
CARICC (2020d), CARICC weekly summary — unofficial translation: 23.03-29.03.2020, 
https://caricc.org/index.php/en/publications/reports/item/download/1376_6f12102fb4626f2390cb0146d65590
93, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
CARICC (2020e), CARICC weekly summary — unofficial translation: 30.03-05.04.2020, 
https://caricc.org/index.php/en/publications/reports/item/download/1378_e0bbf1d75f84a0e83ced2abc11d374
07, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
CARICC (2020f), CARICC weekly summary — unofficial translation: 06-12.04.2020, 
https://caricc.org/index.php/en/publications/reports/item/download/1380_704b291237a69dee152849d0c94c3
dee, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
CARICC (2020g), CARICC weekly summary — unofficial translation: 13-19.04.2020, 
https://caricc.org/index.php/en/publications/reports/item/download/1382_a16064b78a524cf9381d1bf9a16bb9
50, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
CARICC (2020h), CARICC weekly summary — unofficial translation: 20-26.04.2020, 
https://caricc.org/index.php/en/publications/reports/item/download/1384_d4f16b3e1f609ee0bfe06348c74c78
95, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
CMHMDA (Center for Mental Health and Monitoring of Drugs and Alcohol of the Ministry of Health of 
Ukraine) (2019), The 2019 report on the drug situation in Ukraine, CMHMDA, Kiev. 
Dumbadze, A. (2020), ‘MIA, US Central Criminal Department Seize 40 kg of Heroin in Joint Operation’, 
Georgia Today, 26 April 2020 (http://georgiatoday.ge/news/20848/MIA%2C-US-Central-CriminalDepartment-Seize-40-kg-of-Heroin-in-Joint-Operation). 
EHRA (Eurasian Harm Reduction Association) (2020), Harm reduction programmes during the COVID-19 
crisis in central and eastern Europe and central Asia, Eurasian Harm Reduction Association 
(https://harmreductioneurasia.org/hr-programs-overview-in-a-covid-19-situation/). 
EMCDDA (European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction) (2016), Ukraine country overview, 
https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/countries/ukraine_en, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
EMCDDA (2018), Trendspotter manual: a handbook for the rapid assessment of emerging drug-related 
trends, EMCDDA Manuals 10, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg 
(https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/manuals/trendspotter-manual_en). 
EMCDDA (2020), Impact of COVID-19 on patterns of drug use and drug-related harms, EMCDDA 
trendspotter briefing, EMCDDA, Lisbon (https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/ad-hocpublication/impact-covid-19-patterns-drug-use-and-harms_en). 

 
23 
 
EMCDDA (forthcoming), Emerging drug-related trends and threats in eastern European Neighbourhood 
Policy (ENP) area. 
EMCDDA and Europol (2020). EU drug markets: impact of COVID-19, Publications Office of the European 
Union, Luxembourg (https://www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/joint-publications/eu-drug-markets-impactof-covid-19_en). 
INPUD (International Network of People Who Use Drugs) (2020), COVID-19 survey report 1: health & rights 
of people who use drugs in a COVID-19 environment, INPUD, London (https://www.inpud.net/es/en/covid19-survey-report-1-health-rights-people-who-use-drugs-covid-19-environment). 
Otiashvili, D., Kirtadze, I. and Bergen-Cico, D. (2017), ‘Exploring the new phenomena of home-made 
extraction and injection of ephedra plant product in Georgia’, Substance Use and Misuse 52(6), pp. 826-829, 
doi:10.1080/10826084.2016.1263664. 
UNAIDS (Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS) (2019), Trend of new HIV infections, 
https://aidsinfo.unaids.org/, accessed on 27 July 2020. 
UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime) (2019), World drug report 2018, UNODC, Vienna. 
UNODC (2020a), Research brief: ‘COVID-19 and the drug supply chain: from production and trafficking to 
use’, UNODC, Vienna. https://www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-analysis/covid/Covid-19-and-drugsupply-chain-Mai2020.pdf 
UNODC (2020b), Annual drug seizures, https://dataunodc.un.org/data/drugs/Annual%20Drug%20Seizures, 
accessed on 27 July 2020. 
 
Resources on COVID-19 
EMCDDA 
Topics page on COVID-19 and drugs: http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/topics/covid-19 
 
Europe 
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/novel-coronaviruschina 
European Commission action and response team: https://ec.europa.eu/info/live-work-traveleu/health/coronavirus-response_en 
European Science Media Hub (European Parliament): https://sciencemediahub.eu/ 
WHO Europe: http://www.euro.who.int/en/home 
 
World 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/index.html and 
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/homeless-shelters/plan-prepare-respond.html 
WHO: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019 
 

 
24 
 
Acknowledgements 
The EU4MD trendspotter team and other EMCDDA staff members (in alphabetical order): Anne 
Bergenström, Alessandro Pirona, Frédéric Denecker, Ionut Serbanica, Ilze Jekabsone, João Matias, Jane 
Mounteney, Kateřina Škařupová, Paul Griffiths, Robert Patrancus, Thomas Néfau, Vanda Moreira. 
 
The experts in the east ENP countries who provided data (in alphabetical order): Anna Asatryan, Alexey 
Alexandrov, Anton Basenko, Yurii Buchinski, Garegin Dallakyan, Konstyatyn Dumchev, Artashes 
Ghambaryan, Irma Kirtadze, Nika Kobakhidze, Natalia Lebed, Hela Kalandiia, Andrei Modringa, Ivan 
Ponomarev, David Otiashvili, Levan Salamadze, Ketevan Sarajishvili, Dmytro Shved, Aysel Sultan, Kateryna 
Terykh, Olga Varetska, Dumitru Vleju; the EU4MD national contact persons; and the respondents to the 
European Web Survey on Drugs — Impact of COVID-19 in the ENP countries.