EMCDDA: press@emcdda.europa.eu • www.emcdda.europa.eu • Tel. (351) 211 21 02 00. 
 Europol: press@europol.europa.eu • www.europol.europa.eu • Tel. (31) 703 02 50 01. 
EN — No 18/2017
 
NEW REPORT FROM THE EMCDDA AND EUROPOL 
Drugs and the darknet: a growing threat to health and security 
(28.11.2017, LISBON) (EMBARGO 12:45 Western European Time/Lisbon time; 13:45 Central 
European Time) Illicit trade on darknet markets is one sign of the increasingly complex nature of 
transnational organised crime in the European Union. In a new report out today — Drugs and the 
darknet: perspectives for enforcement, research and policy — the EU drugs agency (EMCDDA) 
and Europol present the latest understanding of how darknet markets function, the threats they pose to 
health and security and how Europe can respond. 
The new report is being launched in Lisbon today by: Dimitris Avramopoulos, European 
Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship; Europol Executive Director 
Rob Wainwright and EMCDDA Director Alexis Goosdeel. 
Darknet markets — also known as cryptomarkets — provide a largely anonymous platform for trading in a 
range of illicit goods and services. It is estimated that around two thirds of the offers on darknet markets 
are drug-related. Drug sales on these markets, although modest when compared to the overall retail drug 
market, are significant and appear to be expanding. EU-based suppliers are important players in the 
darknet ecosystem, accounting for some 46% (around EUR 80 million) of all drug sales globally, on the 
16 major darknet markets analysed in the period 2011–15. 
A number of potential threats posed by the darknet are identified in the report, including the development 
of decentralised networks — allowing marketplaces to exist on multiple servers — and new parcel 
delivery and collection systems. 
On this occasion, Dimitris Avramopoulos said: ‘Over the last decade, illegal online markets have 
changed how drugs are bought and sold. Criminal activity on the darknet has become more innovative 
and more difficult to predict. We shouldn’t be playing catch-up with criminals: we should be one step 
ahead of them. That is why we are boosting our efforts to fight illegal drugs and step up cybersecurity. 
Cyberspace has no borders and we should all work together, the Commission, Member States the 
EMCDDA, Europol and our international partners. Our aim is to stop huge profits from drugs ending up in 
the pockets of organised crime groups in Europe and beyond, but most importantly to protect the health 
of our citizens and in particular of young people.' 
Rob Wainwright added: ‘Addressing cybercrime and the use of information technology platforms for 
criminal purposes has become an important policing priority across the EU. The recent takedown in July 
2017 of Alphabay and Hansa, two of the largest darknet markets, is an example of how law enforcement 
can intervene to disrupt this environment. Despite this positive achievement, those involved in the online 
drug trade appear to be resilient to such disruption and able to re-organise rapidly. European-level 
cooperation and intelligence sharing, along with the targeting of high-impact vendors, will be critical in 
countering this threat’. 
According to the report, market disruption should form part of a broader, more integrated set of 
measures implemented as part of an overall strategy to address drug trade in the darknet ecosystem. 
 
 

 Drugs and the darknet: perspectives for enforcement, research and policy I EMBARGO 12:45 WET/13.45 CET 28.11.2017 
 
emcdda.europa.eu 
2
 
Darknet investigation teams, modelled and promoted by Europol, will be at the heart of such an integrated 
strategy. Engagement with key industries (e.g. information technology, social media, payment and 
product distribution services) will be increasingly important for identifying and responding to new threats 
in this area. 
Alexis Goosdeel noted: ‘In just a few clicks, buyers can purchase almost any type of drug on the darknet 
whether synthetic drugs, cannabis, cocaine, heroin or a range of new psychoactive substances, including 
highly potent fentanils. This poses a growing threat to the health and security of citizens and communities 
across the EU. The new insights provided by this joint analysis make an important contribution to 
informing and preparing Europe’s response to this threat’. 
The dynamic nature of online markets, with their ability to evolve to counter threats and exploit new 
opportunities, means that enhanced monitoring capacity in this area is crucial to ensure that responses 
keep pace with developments. The analysis presented in the report is forward-looking, as the challenges 
in this area are constantly evolving. 
The online trade in illicit goods and services was recognised as one of the engines of organised crime 
and a key threat to the safety of EU citizens in Europol’s 2017 EU Serious and Organised Crime Threat 
Assessment (SOCTA). It is also being tackled as part of the coordinated response to serious and 
organised crime set out in the EU Policy Cycle for organised and serious international crime 
(2018–2021). 
Today’s report covers three areas: key concepts; an EU-focused analysis of drug supply on darknet 
markets; and law-enforcement perspectives. The analysis provides a policy-orientated review intended to 
facilitate discussions at EU level on how to respond to the phenomenon. It also presents 
recommendations in the areas of law enforcement, monitoring and policy. 
The report is available in English: 
Drugs and the darknet: perspectives for enforcement, research and policy 
www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/joint-publications/drugs-and-the-darknet 
 
Audiovisual material available: 
Cryptocurrencies in the darknet 
https://youtu.be/uJ8IvAc5sr8 
Darknet markets ecosystem 
https://youtu.be/u72kp9oT0rc 
 
Press conference 
 
Venue: EMCDDA, Palacete do Relógio, Praça Europa 2, Cais do Sodré, 1249-289 Lisbon 
Date: Tuesday 28 November 2017 
Time: 12:45 Western European Time/Lisbon time (13:45 Central European Time) 
Language: The press conference will be conducted in English 
 
Press contacts 
 
Commissioner’s spokespersons’ service: 
Tove Ernst (32) 2 298 67 64; Katarzyna Kolanko (32) 2 296 34 44 
EMCDDA: press@emcdda.europa.eu — Tel. (351) 211 21 02 00 / 02 40 
Europol: press@europol.europa.eu — Tel. (31) 703 02 50 01 
 
Experts at the EMCDDA and Europol will be available for interviews via the press offices.