Newsletter of the European Monitoring
Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction
(Final print edition)
In this issue: Health and social responses to drug problems: a European guide | 
Lisbon Addictions 2017 | Third international symposium on drug-impaired 
driving | Testing the waters | Drugs and the darknet | JHA agency directors 
meet in Lisbon | A faster response to NPS | New EMCDDA products and 
services | A last word from the editor
ISSN 1683-3252
100
How to respond to the problems of older 
heroin users? How to tackle deaths from 
highly potent fentanils? How to prevent 
harms from drug and alcohol use in 
festivals and clubs? These are among the 
questions explored in a new European 
guide released by the EMCDDA on 
24 October (1). Drawing on insights from 
30 countries, Health and social responses 
to drug problems: a European guide 
presents the agency’s first overview of 
actions and interventions currently 
available to address the consequences 
of illicit drug use. It is designed to benefit 
those approaching drug problems from 
a public health planning perspective as 
well as frontline workers and practitioners.
Drug use today presents us with a complex 
and ever-shifting set of problems and 
a wide diversity of programmes exists to 
address differing needs and objectives. 
The new guide provides practical guidance 
on how responses in the drugs area can be 
better conceived, targeted and delivered, 
furnishing the building blocks for 
developing, and successfully implementing, 
interventions.
EMCDDA Director Alexis Goosdeel said: 
‘The EMCDDA is committed to assisting 
policymakers and practitioners in planning 
and delivering policies and programmes 
that contribute to a healthier and more 
secure Europe. This innovative new guide 
surveys some of the main public health 
challenges in the drugs field today and 
provides a map with which to navigate 
the various stages of designing, targeting 
and implementing effective responses. 
To remain relevant, those involved in 
responding to drug problems must be 
prepared to adapt, innovate and develop 
new partnerships. This practical guide 
equips them with the tools to respond 
to the drug problems of today, but also 
to prepare for those of tomorrow’.
The guide views health and social responses 
to drug problems from the three 
perspectives of responding to: problems 
associated with different types of drug and 
patterns of use; the needs of different 
groups (e.g. women, young people, migrants, 
ageing drug users); and problems in different 
settings (e.g. prisons, nightlife, festivals, 
schools, workplace, local communities).
Designed as an initial reference point, 
the publication includes summaries and 
user-friendly signposting and acts as 
a gateway to a wide range of online 
resources (see p. 7).
 Nicola Singleton 
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/
responses-guide
Goosdeel: ‘This practical guide offers the tools 
to respond to the drug problems of today, 
but also to prepare for those of tomorrow’.
New European guide on responding to drugs
Evidence-based responses gain ground
‘Evidence-based responses appear to be 
steadily gaining ground in Europe, and 
within the current financial climate, there 
appears to be greater interest than ever 
in ensuring that scarce health resources 
are well spent’, says the new European 
guide. It underlines the importance of 
understanding what evidence exists 
to support a specific intervention, 
and how to use it. Here it provides 
‘evidence ratings’ for the different 
actions explored, but stresses 
that what works in one group or setting 
may fail in a different context.
A key message emerging from the guide is 
that using evidence is an ‘ongoing process’ 
and that it is essential to develop the 
knowledge base through collaboration in 
research, monitoring and the sharing of best 
practice. The guide links to the EMCDDA 
Best practice portal, which contains a wide 
range of resources, including a new 
‘Xchange’ registry (see p. 7).
Drug problems often interact or co-exist 
with other health and social problems. 
The guide therefore also underscores 
the value of drug services forming 
partnerships with other areas (e.g. sexual 
and mental health care, housing 
services) to improve effectiveness and 
efficiency. ‘Effective cooperation 
between services is essential to meeting 
the complex health and social needs of 
many of those with drug problems’, 
states the guide. 

FEATURE
2
SPOTLIGHT
RESPONSES GUIDE
NEW TECHNOLOGIES
Harnessing the 
potential of new 
technologies
The internet, social networking apps, 
new payment technologies and encryption 
software are changing the way in which 
drugs can be bought and sold. These 
changes not only affect drug markets 
and consumption patterns but also 
offer new opportunities for health and social responses. ‘To remain relevant, those involved 
in responding to drug problems will need to ... harness the potential of new technologies to 
support the better delivery of prevention, treatment and harm reduction initiatives’, affirms 
the new European guide. A spotlight is placed on e-health interventions, including m-health 
apps, which can use digital technologies to provide harm-reduction advice, train treatment 
professionals and reach out to vulnerable young people who may be reluctant to engage 
with formal services. 
DRUG-RELATED HARMS
Opportunities and gaps
The guide reviews progress to date in preventing and reducing drug-related harms 
(e.g. via opioid substitution treatment) but highlights areas where opportunities exist for 
further improvement. Hepatitis C infections account for a considerable share of drugrelated health costs in Europe but chances to eradicate the disease exist with the 
emergence of new treatments. Here it highlights the benefits of better coordination 
between drug and specialist liver services to guarantee adequate treatment coverage.
Risk factors associated with fatal overdoses are now well known and there have been 
some notable advances in life-saving interventions (e.g. take-home naloxone). However, the 
increasing number of overdose deaths in Europe suggests a need to expand the provision 
of these, and other, interventions which reduce the risk of opioid-related deaths.
ADAPTING TO CHANGE
Flexible responses needed
New policy perspectives and changing drug problems bring fresh challenges for 
European drug responses. As highlighted in the guide, flexibility is needed: ‘...modern 
drug problems can change quickly and have the potential to overwhelm existing drug 
policies and response models’. Recent challenges include the rapid emergence of new 
psychoactive substances, such as highly potent opioids and synthetic cannabinoids. 
As more new substances enter the market, toxicological and forensic capacity must also 
be improved as part of the frontline response.
Against the contemporary backdrop of socio-demographic and economic change, the guide 
explores the potential vulnerability of migrants and asylum seekers to drug problems and the 
need for services which recognise diversity and build trust. Recent changes in the regulatory 
framework for cannabis occurring in parts of the Americas are also generating interest among 
policymakers and the public in Europe and there is a growing interest, in both regions, in 
exploiting the therapeutic potential of cannabis-based medicines. Developments in the 
cannabis policy area may have knock-on effects for prevention, treatment and harm reduction 
responses to this drug, and valuable lessons may be learnt from innovations outside Europe.
For more on these topics, see news release in 24 languages: 
www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/13/emcdda-publishes-responses-guide_en
M-health involves delivering e-health interventions using 
mobile phones and similar devices.
EMCDDA scientific 
award winners 2017
Winners of the 2017 EMCDDA scientific 
award gathered in Lisbon on 25 October 
for the seventh annual award ceremony 
hosted by the agency (1). The acclaimed 
writers received a non-monetary prize 
and presented their articles during 
Lisbon Addictions 2017 (2).
The prize, inaugurated in 2011 by the 
EMCDDA and its Scientific Committee, 
celebrates scientific writing and 
distinguishes high-quality research in the 
field of illicit drugs. This year, close to 
50 papers were nominated by members 
of the agency’s Scientific Committee, 
the Reitox national focal points, drug 
research societies with a European focus, 
peer-reviewed scientific journals and by 
EMCDDA staff.
The four winners (primary authors) were: 
Annelies Cannaert, Pharm. D. (Belgium), 
Professor Frederik L. Altice MD 
(United States); Melvin Soudijn, PhD 
(The Netherlands) and Mascha Nuijten, 
PhD (The Netherlands).
Chair of the EMCDDA Scientific 
Committee Dr Anne Line BretevilleJensen said: ‘New scientific 
developments can broaden the 
EMCDDA’s understanding of the drugs 
phenomenon, helping it to innovate and 
keep pace with new challenges and 
threats. The EMCDDA scientific award 
allows us to showcase major 
advancements in the field of drugs and 
addictions and maintain an ongoing 
dialogue with the research and scientific 
community across the EU. The agency 
and its Scientific Committee congratulate 
the winners and applaud their robust 
contributions, both to our knowledge base 
as well as to policy and practice.’
 Maria Moreira 
(1) For details on the winning papers, see www.
emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/10/scientificaward-2017_en
(2) For more, see www.lisbonaddictions.eu/
lisbon-addictions-2017
©EMCDDA

3
CONFERENCES
Do changes in cannabis legislation impact on drivers’ behaviour?
ADDICTIONS
Lisbon Addictions 2017
Leading international experts in the field of addiction science met 
in Lisbon from 24–26 October for the Second European 
conference on addictive behaviours and dependencies (1). 
More than 1 200 participants attended the high-level event, which 
brought together researchers, practitioners and policy experts from 
over 70 countries. Latest scientific evidence in the area was 
discussed and challenges relating to illicit drugs, alcohol, tobacco, 
gambling, the internet and other addictive behaviours explored.
During the three-day conference, close to 500 presentations were 
delivered, over 200 posters exhibited and more than 20 lectures 
offered by internationally renowned researchers and professionals (2). 
Prominent partners contributing to the scientific excellence of the 
event featured national bodies as well as European and international 
organisations. A novelty at this year’s conference were sessions 
targeted at young researchers. These were developed under the 
EC-funded TWIST project (Training WIth Stakeholders), which 
supported the involvement of early-stage professionals at the 
conference (3). The Third European conference on addictive behaviours 
and dependencies will take place in Lisbon from 23–25 October 2019.
 Renate Hochwieser and Maria Moreira 
(1) For more, see www.lisbonaddictions.eu
(2) Selected presentations from Lisbon Addictions 2017 will be available soon 
on the conference website. 
(3) For more, see www.twist-train.eu
DRIVING
Third international symposium 
on drug-impaired driving
What are the most practical and accurate methods for testing 
drivers for drug use? Do changes in cannabis legislation impact on 
drivers’ behaviour? How to educate the public on cannabis-impaired 
driving? These were among the questions addressed at the Third 
international symposium on drug-impaired driving, held in Lisbon on 
23 October (1). The event, which took place on the eve of Lisbon 
Addictions 2017, was a collaborative initiative of the EMCDDA, 
the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction (CCSA), 
the US National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA international 
programme) and the New Zealand Drug Foundation.
The symposium focused on recent changes in cannabis policy in 
various parts of the world and their implications for drug-impaired 
driving. Guest speakers from Canada, Ireland, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Portugal, the UK and the US shared their experiences in 
this fast-moving policy area, as did speakers from the World 
Health Organization (WHO), the Global Road Safety Partnership 
and the International Council on Alcohol, Drugs and Traffic Safety.
Presenters agreed that, with more of the population now having 
access to cannabis (whether for recreational or medical 
purposes), drug-impaired driving has become an increasingly 
relevant issue. To date, basic roadside behaviour tests (e.g. 
walking straight) and biological sample tests (e.g. breathalysers, 
oral fluid tests) accurately identify impairment by alcohol but, 
so far, are less accurate for cannabis.
Speakers presented survey results indicating that cannabis users 
do not always believe that their driving is impaired after taking the 
drug and emphasised that necessary measures need to be 
implemented to increase testing and dissuade such drivers. 
Lawmakers may have to choose a ‘least-worst’ option now but be 
ready to adjust it in line with future research findings. A range of 
responses and penalties may be necessary to dissuade driving 
after taking cannabis, with options varying according to whether 
the goal is road safety or cannabis control. Based on the findings 
of the symposium, work has now started on a report for 
policymakers answering some Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) 
on this issue, scheduled to be published early in 2018.
 Brendan Hughes and Liesbeth Vandam 
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/9/symposium-drugimpaired-driving_en
WASTEWATER
Testing the waters
Leading European and international experts met in Lisbon from 
26–27 October to review the state of the art of the rapidly 
developing scientific area of wastewater-based epidemiology. 
They gathered at ‘Testing the waters 2017’, the Third international 
conference on wastewater analysis, organised by the Sewage 
analysis CORe group — Europe (SCORE) and the EMCDDA. 
The conference took place during Lisbon Addictions 2017 (1).
One of the main objectives of the conference was to bridge the fields 
of wastewater-based epidemiology and more established drug 
epidemiology and examine the current applications and future 
perspectives for this innovative drug monitoring approach. At the 
conference, participants presented case studies and explored novel 
uses of wastewater analysis, including the forensic side of wastewaterbased drug epidemiology and the estimation of medicine misuse.
During the event, the organisers awarded prizes for: ‘Best poster’ to Lisa 
Benaglia, Switzerland (Assessing the representativeness of a population 
equivalent: case of ammonium) and ‘Best paper’ to Jack Rice, United 
Kingdom (Quantitative proteomics for molecular diagnostics of public 
health: the quest for biomarkers of infectious disease).
 Renate Hochwieser and Liesbeth Vandam 
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/12/testing-waterconference_en and http://score-cost.eu/network-activities/meetings/ttw2017/

4
BOOKSHELF
FEATURE
Handbook of 
cannabis
The Handbook of cannabis is 
a comprehensive collection of medical 
and scientific research, bringing 
together contributions from leading 
experts from around the world.
Divided into six parts, the book covers 
a wide array of topics including: 
the history and regulation of the drug; 
cannabis cultivation (including selective 
breeding); pharmacological aspects; 
and how the drug is absorbed and 
metabolised by the body. It also looks at 
the rapidly growing group of synthetic 
cannabinoids, currently used as ‘legal 
highs’, and presents clinical data on 
medical cannabis. The final section of 
the book addresses recreational 
cannabis use and examines harm 
reduction strategies and public 
education.
Looking to the future, the handbook 
explores the potential for clinical 
applications (of the 100 known 
phytocannabinoids that have been 
identified in the plant, only 12 have 
been investigated pharmacologically). 
Each chapter is written by a group of 
one or more authors recognised 
internationally as an established expert 
in that topic. The book provides 
a detailed overview of the science, 
culture and therapeutic potential of 
Europe’s most widely used illicit drug.
Editor: Pertwee, R.G.
Publisher: Oxford University Press (OUP)
Language: English
ISBN: 978-01-9879-260-4 
Ordering information: https://global.oup.
com/academic/product/handbook-ofcannabis-9780198792604?cc=us&
lang=en&
The EMCDDA is responsible for the selection of 
materials for the Bookshelf and for the text 
presented. However, responsibility for the content 
of these materials and the opinions expressed 
therein lies with the authors themselves.
Drugs and the darknet: 
a growing threat to health and security
Illicit trade on darknet markets is one sign 
of the increasingly complex nature of 
transnational organised crime in the 
European Union. Darknet markets — also 
known as cryptomarkets — provide 
a largely anonymous platform for trading 
in a range of illicit goods and services. 
Although modest when compared to the 
overall drug market, drug sales on the 
darknet are significant and appear to be 
expanding — now being estimated to 
account for around two thirds of all 
darknet market activity. This development 
poses a growing threat to the health and 
security of citizens and communities 
across the EU.
In a new report launched by the EMCDDA and Europol on 28 November — Drugs and the 
darknet: perspectives for enforcement, research and policy — the agencies present the 
current understanding of the functioning of darknet markets, outline potential countermeasures for policymakers and lawenforcement professionals and recommend 
areas for further monitoring and research.
In the report, the EMCDDA and Europol have 
combined the latest available data, identified 
knowledge gaps and outlined strategies to 
reduce criminal opportunities in the darknet 
ecosystem. Innovation in criminal activity in this area represents a challenge to 
established law-enforcement practice and, if operational capacity is to keep pace, 
responses must be developed that are equally innovative and technologically informed. 
The new report contributes to this objective by providing the conceptual framework 
necessary for understanding the phenomenon, accompanied by an EU-focused analysis 
of drug supply on darknet markets and a review of the challenges and the possible 
opportunities for law enforcement.
The release of the report is timely, following the recent takedown in July 2017 of Alphabay 
and Hansa, two of the largest darknet markets. Yet, despite this positive achievement, 
those involved in the online trade in drugs appear to be resilient to law-enforcement 
disruption and quick to adapt and develop new strategies and business models to reduce 
the risk of detection.
According to the report, market disruption needs to form part of a broader, more 
integrated set of measures implemented within an overall strategy to address the drug 
market in the darknet. Engagement with the information technology industry will be a key 
factor.
European-level cooperation and coordination are likely to be critically important for an 
effective response in this area. The insights provided by this new report will make an 
important contribution to informing and preparing Europe’s response to the growing 
threat posed by darknet drug sales.
The online trade in illicit goods and services was recognised as a key threat to the safety 
of EU citizens in the 2017 EU Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment (SOCTA) 
and is being tackled as part of the coordinated response to serious and organised 
crime set out in the EU Policy cycle for organised and serious international crime 
(2018–2021). The analysis presented in the report is therefore forward-looking, as the 
challenges in this area are constantly evolving.
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/joint-publications/drugs-and-the-darknet
and www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/home_en
© istockphoto.com
Darknet markets provide a largely anonymous platform 
for trading in a range of illicit goods and services.
 Drugs are estimated 
 to account for around 
 two thirds of all darknet 
 market activity 

5
JHA agency directors meet in Lisbon
The EMCDDA’s chairmanship of the Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) 
agencies’ network is drawing to a close (1). On 28 November, the 
EMCDDA hosted a meeting of the network’s directors to take stock of 
the JHA work programme achievements in 2017 and the way forward 
in 2018. The high-level event brought together Dimitris Avramopoulos, 
European Commissioner for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship; 
the JHA agency directors and key stakeholders in the network.
During the meeting, the participants discussed opportunities for 
enhanced inter-agency cooperation to support the EU institutions and 
Member States in responding to Europe’s challenges in the dynamic, 
and constantly evolving fields, of migration and security.
The network was deemed to have played an important role in improving 
the management of the EU external borders, fighting organised crime 
and counteracting terrorism and cybercrime. The network examined 
links between migration, security and health issues and put the 
spotlight on the increased role of the internet and the use of cyberspace 
for criminal purposes.
As in previous years, technical support provided by the JHA agencies to 
the implementation of the European Agenda on Migration and to the 
European Agenda on Security remained at the heart of the network’s 
activities. Several meetings took place during the year bringing together 
the expertise of all nine agencies and identifying priority areas of work 
in analytical and operational fields, training, external relations and ICT.
The network’s achievements in 2017 will be presented to 
the Council’s Standing Committee on Operational Cooperation on 
Internal Security (COSI) and the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice 
and Home Affairs (LIBE) of the European Parliament. EIGE will chair 
the JHA agencies’ network in 2018, followed by Europol in 2019.
 Klaudia Palczak, Renate De Neve and Leen Gijbels 
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/about/partners/jha
PARTNERS
INTERNATIONAL
New accord with Swiss FOPH
Europe’s regional monitoring system on drugs has been enriched, 
thanks to a new working arrangement signed in Lisbon on 
12 September between the EMCDDA and the Federal Office of Public 
Health of Switzerland (FOPH). The signatories were Alexis Goosdeel, 
EMCDDA Director and Pascal Strupler, Director of the FOPH (1).
The new arrangement is in line with the EMCDDA Strategy 2025, 
which stresses that the agency should develop its services in 
partnership with national, European and international actors 
working in the drugs field in order to fulfil its role as the leading 
EU provider of evidence on drugs (2).
The working arrangement was endorsed by the EMCDDA 
Management Board in June 2017, following consultation with the 
European Commission. It takes place within the agency’s 
mandate for cooperation with third (non-EU) countries and will be 
implemented through a joint work programme.
The agreement includes steps to enhance the knowledge base on 
the drug situation and responses to it, through cooperation in the 
area of data-collection methodology and through data sharing in 
key areas (e.g. demand and demand reduction, supply and supply 
reduction, legal aspects and policy models). It also allows the two 
bodies to exchange experience on health and social responses 
to drug problems (e.g. harm reduction, social integration and 
preventing communicable diseases), a topic in the spotlight in 
the EMCDDA’s first European guide on the issue (see p. 1). 
Finally, the accord pays special attention to the exchange of 
expertise in the area of new psychoactive substances (NPS).
 Cécile Martel 
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/fs8/swiss_workingarrangement_en
(2) See p. 17 www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/work-programmes-andstrategies/strategy-2025_en
EMCDDA launches new online resources to support drug policy evaluation
Evaluation is essential for effective 
policymaking, helping to ensure that policies 
and programmes have the desired effect, 
provide value for money and do not bring 
negative unintended consequences. 
The value of evaluation has been recognised 
in all EU drug strategies and in the 
strategies of many EU Member States. 
On 10 October, the EMCDDA launched 
a new package of online resources 
designed to inform and support those considering, or involved in, 
drug policy evaluation (1).
The new web area provides access to a wide range of 
materials, including Evaluating drug policy: a seven-step 
guide to support the commissioning and managing of 
evaluations. A timeline of EU drug strategies and action plans 
and their evaluation (1990–2017) is also presented, along 
with an overview of national drug strategy evaluation in 
30 countries up to 2016 (EU 28, Turkey and Norway). The web 
area, which links to additional resources, is targeted at EU 
and national drug policymakers and planners as well 
as researchers and professionals working in the drugs field.
Evaluating drug policy is a challenging task. The EMCDDA 
supports the European Commission in its evaluations of the EU 
drug strategies and action plans. It is also increasingly called 
upon to assist governments in evaluating national drug 
strategies. The new resources reflect the aims of the EMCDDA 
Strategy 2025, which promises to provide the agency’s 
customers with tailored products and services to help them 
achieve their goals (including evaluating policies and strategies).
 Nicola Singleton, Danilo Ballotta and Eoghan Quigley 
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/topic-overviews/
policy-evaluation_en and www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/fs9/
drug-policy-evaluation_en
A seven-step guide to support the 
commissioning and managing of 
evaluations
Evaluating 
drug policy
EN
DRUG POLICY

6
Acryloylfentanyl and furanylfentanyl 
to be placed under control across the EU 
On 25 September and 15 November respectively, the EU reacted to serious concerns over 
the use of the synthetic opioids acryloylfentanyl and furanylfentanyl by deciding to 
subject them to ‘control measures’ throughout the Union (1). Following publication of the 
decisions in the Official Journal of the European Union, Member States will have one year 
to introduce the controls into national legislation. 
The implementing decisions of the Council of the EU were adopted in the final stage of the 
three-step legal procedure designed to respond to potentially threatening new psychoactive 
substances (NPS) available on the market (2)(3). The substances in question — structurally 
related to fentanyl — have been raising health concerns in Europe after harmful effects related 
to their use were reported by the Member States through the EU Early Warning System (EWS). 
The decisions are based on the findings of formal risk assessments of the drugs, 
conducted by the extended EMCDDA Scientific Committee on 22 February and 23 May 
respectively (4). At the time of risk assessment, acryloylfentanyl had been detected in six 
EU Member States and 47 deaths associated with the substance had been reported by 
three EU countries. Twenty three deaths associated with furanylfentanyl were reported 
by six EU countries. It was concluded that the high potency of the substances constitutes 
a serious risk of acute toxicity through respiratory depression. 
 Rachel Christie, Ana Gallegos and Roumen Sedefov 
(1) N-(1-phenethylpiperidin-4-yl)-N-phenylacrylamide (acryloylfentanyl) and N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-phenylethyl)
piperidin-4-yl]furan-2-carboxamide (furanylfentanyl). 
For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/8/acryloylfentanyl-under-control-across-eu_en and 
www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/15/council-implementing-decision-control-furanylfentanyl_en
(2) Council Decision 2005/387/JHA: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:
32005D0387:EN:HTML
(3) www.emcdda.europa.eu/activities/action-on-new-drugs 
(4) Risk assessment reports to be published in the coming months (in English) at 
www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/risk-assessments
NEW PSYCHOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
HIGHLIGHTS
Nine risk assessments in 2017
In 2017, the EMCDDA has carried out nine risk assessments on new psychoactive substances 
(NPS)(1). In addition to the two new synthetic opioids acryloylfentanyl and furanylfentanyl — 
risk assessed in February and May respectively — a further seven substances were risk 
assessed early in November. Of these, four were synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists 
(AB-CHMINACA, ADB-CHMINACA, CUMYL-4CN-BINACA, 5F-MDMB-PINACA) and three were 
fentanils (4F-iBF, carfentanil and THF-F). The need for these assessments reflects the growing 
harms caused by these two groups of substances within Europe over the past few years.
 Michael Evans-Brown and Rachel Christie 
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/activities/action-on-new-drugs
A faster response to NPS
Europe’s ability to rapidly respond to public health and security threats caused by new 
psychoactive substances (NPS) will be significantly strengthened, thanks to new 
legislation published on 21 November (1). The legislation will include a stronger EU Early 
Warning System (EWS) and a faster risk-assessment process.
The developments are in response to the recent growth in the market in NPS and follow a 
proposal from the European Commission (EC) comprising: a Regulation regarding information 
exchange on, and an early warning system and risk assessment procedure for, new psychoactive 
substances (amending the EMCDDA founding regulation) and a Directive including new 
psychoactive substances in the definition of ‘drug’. Compared with the previous procedure, 
the new legislation introduces shorter deadlines, thereby bringing a faster response to NPS.
(1) For more, see link www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/16/new-legislation-response-new-psychoactive-drugs_en
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ HIS/?uri=consil:ST_9566_2017_INIT 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ HIS/?uri=CONSIL:ST_9567_2017_INIT
Expert meeting 
results
From 18–21 September, the EMCDDA 
brought together experts from some 
40 countries for its annual expert 
meetings on the Treatment Demand 
Indicator (TDI) and Drug-Related Deaths 
(DRD)(1). TDI and DRD are two of the 
five key epidemiological indicators on 
which the EMCDDA bases its analysis of 
trends and developments in the EU drug 
situation. These indicators are also 
essential for any analysis of the impact 
of responses and policies.
Opioids, mainly heroin, still represent 
the main reason for entering drug 
treatment, although most clients use 
multiple substances. The TDI meeting 
discussed how an ageing cohort of drug 
patients, with complex health and social 
needs, now poses a challenge for drug 
treatment services. Drug patients often 
suffer from psychiatric comorbidity, 
demanding that mental health and 
substance use disorders be tackled at 
the same time.
The DRD experts explored signs of an 
increase in the number of fatalities 
compared to last year, with particular 
attention being given to the monitoring 
of overdose deaths through special 
mortality registries and to improving 
forensic toxicology practices and 
comparability. Central to the 
discussions were widespread 
responses to reduce drug deaths 
(from mainstream opioid substitution 
treatment to take-home naloxone 
programmes and drug consumption 
rooms). Valuable opinions were also 
shared on coding and on national 
statistics.
 Linda Montanari and Isabelle Giraudon 
(1) For more, see: 
www.emcdda.europa.eu/meetings/2017/tdi 
www.emcdda.europa.eu/meetings/2017/drd

7
PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
JUST PUBLISHED
How to estimate 
the cost of drug 
treatment in Europe?
It is estimated that 
over 1 million people 
receive treatment 
for drug-related 
problems in the 
European Union 
every year. With 
shrinking public 
budgets, increasing 
pressure on health 
systems, changes in the substances 
used and the need to provide ongoing 
care to chronic cases, how can we 
estimate the cost of drug treatment in 
Europe? This is the question explored 
in a new EMCDDA Insights publication 
entitled Drug treatment expenditure: 
a methodological overview (1).
Data collection and research are well 
established in Europe on treatment 
activities and their outcomes, yet 
information is limited on the costs of 
drug treatment. In a first step towards 
filling this data gap, the new report offers 
a unique overview of the models 
currently used to estimate drug 
treatment expenditure around the world.
EMCDDA Director Alexis Goosdeel said: 
‘In this economic climate, more than ever, 
policymakers and service planners require 
data and information on the capacity, 
performance and costs of national 
treatment systems in order to support 
investment decisions and to make sound 
policy choices. I hope that this report will 
be seen as an important signpost in the 
development of improved estimates for 
public expenditure on drug treatment and 
as a contribution to defining good practice 
in drug policy evaluation. Ultimately this 
will lead to a more cost-effective allocation 
of resources’.
The report sheds light on current good 
practice in this field and suggests areas 
for future methodological development. 
Drawing on the experience of 
economists, policy advisers and 
scholars from Europe, the United States 
and Australia, it provides a state-of-theart overview of estimating drug 
treatment expenditure as well as data 
sources, their uses and limitations.
 Cláudia Costa Storti 
(1) For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/
2017/11/insights-drug-treatment-expenditure_en
Health and social responses to drug 
problems: a European guide
The EMCDDA released Health and social responses to drug 
problems: a European guide on 24 October during a week of events 
organised around Lisbon Addictions 2017. Designed as a reference 
document, it incorporates summaries and user-friendly signposting 
to highlight key information, best practice examples and 
implications for policy and practice. It also acts as a gateway to 
a wide range of online resources (see ‘Background’ and ‘Resources’ 
sections on the guide webpage). These include experts’ background 
papers, policy and practice briefings and topic pages covering harm 
reduction, prevention, prisons and treatment.
Available in English at www.emcdda.europa.eu/responses-guide
Xchange registry: prevention programmes
On 24 October, the EMCDDA launched Xchange, a new online registry of evidence-based 
prevention programmes. In its first phase, the registry will make available manualised 
interventions that European evaluation studies consider to have beneficial outcomes 
relating to substance use. In addition to providing information on the effectiveness of 
programmes, the registry also offers information on the experiences of professionals 
who have implemented these programmes in individual European countries. This enables 
decision-makers to assess the ease with which programmes can be implemented in 
different social, cultural and organisational contexts.
For more, see www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/fs10/xchange-registry_en
New developments in national drug strategies
This latest edition in the EMCDDA Papers series provides an 
overview of some recent developments in the tools most 
commonly used to manage national drug policies: strategies, 
coordination mechanisms and evaluations. It is based on an 
analysis of reports on national drug policies (compiled by the 
Reitox national focal points in the 30 EMCDDA reporting 
countries) as well as on consultation with experts and on 
scientific literature.
Available in English at www.emcdda.europa.eu/publications/emcdda-papers/
new-developments-national-drug-strategies-eu_en
Drug-related infectious diseases in Europe
This latest edition in the EMCDDA Rapid communication series 
presents an update on infectious diseases related to drug use in 
Europe for the period up to June 2017. It provides an overview of the 
most recent data on infectious diseases among people who inject 
drugs (PWID) in Europe, collected through the EMCDDA drugrelated infectious diseases (DRID) key epidemiological indicator, 
and examines ongoing responses to these. The report includes 
highlights and new findings discussed during the DRID indicator’s 
annual expert meeting, held from 14–16 June 2017 in Lisbon.
Available in English at www.emcdda.europa.eu/rapid-communications/2017/
drug-related-infectious-diseases-in-europe_en
ISSN 2314-9264
INSIGHTS
24
Drug treatment 
expenditure: 
a methodological 
overview 
Update from the EMCDDA expert network
October 2017
Drug-related infectious 
diseases in Europe
RAPID COMMUNICATION

CALENDAR 2017
OFFICIAL PUBLISHER: European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction I PROPRIETOR: EMCDDA I DIRECTOR: Alexis Goosdeel I 
EDITOR: Kathy Robertson I Printed in Luxembourg I ISSN: 0873-5379 (print) 1683-3252 (pdf) I CATALOGUE NUMBER: TD-AA-17-004-EN-C 
(print) TD-AA-17-004-EN-N (pdf) I Printed on chlorine‐free paper I © European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction.
Drugnet Europe is a newsletter published by the European Monitoring Centre 
for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA), Lisbon. Any item may be reproduced 
provided the source is acknowledged. For free subscriptions, please specify 
your requirements via e-mail: publications@emcdda.europa.eu
EMCDDA, Praça Europa 1, Cais do Sodré, 1249-289 Lisbon, Portugal
Tel. (351) 211 21 02 00 I Fax (351) 211 21 03 80
info@emcdda.europa.eu I emcdda.europa.eu
facebook.com/emcdda I twitter.com/emcdda
TD-AA-17-004-EN-N
EMCDDA meetings
9 November:
47th meeting of the EMCDDA Scientific 
Committee, Lisbon.
9 November: 
European Drug Report 2017 national launch, 
Warsaw, Poland.
14 November:
European Drug Report 2017 national launch, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
28 November:
Directors of JHA agencies’ network meeting, 
Lisbon.
28 November:
Launch of the EMCDDA–Europol report 
on Drugs and the darknet: perspectives for 
enforcement, research and policy, Lisbon.
28 November–
1 December:
6th extended Reitox Week and 57th Reitox 
Heads of focal point meeting, Lisbon.
5–6 December:
17th EU Early Warning System meeting, 
Lisbon.
13 December:
Meetings of the EMCDDA Executive 
Committee and Budget Committee, Lisbon.
14–15 December:
EMCDDA Management Board meeting, Lisbon.
External meetings
13–17 November:
2nd COPOLAD annual meeting of drug 
observatories, Lisbon.
16–17 November:
6th inter-sessional meetings of the CND, Vienna.
20–21 November:
ESPAD Assembly, Pisa.
21–22 November: 
81st meeting of the permanent correspondents 
of the Pompidou Group, Strasbourg.
21–23 November:
8th meeting of the international network on 
precursor control, Pompidou Group, Strasbourg.
28 November–
1 December:
2nd COPOLAD annual week on precursors, 
Brasilia.
11–12 December:
WHO conference on prison health, Lisbon.
12–14 December:
Expert group on drug-related cybercrime, 
Pompidou Group, Dublin.
EU meetings
8–9 November:
Horizontal working party on drugs, Brussels.
20–21 November:
EU-ANSA meeting, Lisbon.
28 November:
Horizontal working party on drugs, Brussels.
European Commissioner 
Julian King visits EMCDDA
European Commissioner for the Security Union, Julian King paid his 
first visit to the EMCDDA on 6 November, where he met EMCDDA 
Director Alexis Goosdeel and the agency’s experts in the area of 
security (1). 
The EMCDDA’s long-term strategic vision is to contribute to 
a ‘healthier and more secure Europe’ by providing sound evidence 
for policies and actions on drugs. During the meeting, EMCDDA 
experts presented to Commissioner King the agency’s contribution 
to the EU Policy Cycle on Serious Organised International Crime, 
based on its strategic overview of the EU drug market, including drug 
production and trafficking and current threat assessments linked to 
new synthetic opioids (particularly new fentanils).
(1) www.emcdda.europa.eu/news/2017/14/visit-commissioner-julian-king_en
A last word from the editor
And so we reach our 100th edition and the end of Drugnet Europe as 
we know it. After 21 years of offering you the newsletter in print, we 
are now winding up this print edition in favour of a more dynamic, 
digital delivery of our news, brought to you with greater frequency.
Drugnet Europe was first launched on 26 September 1996 and, 
since then, has been through countless changes, including four 
image updates and regular modifications in periodicity, linguistic 
options and focus. Hundreds of authors have contributed to the 
newsletter over this time and contractors from seven countries 
have helped shape it and send it to press.
As one of the first EMCDDA publications, the newsletter has 
followed the growth of the agency from its infancy to maturity and, 
as such, is a key resource in our institutional memory. I have had 
the pleasure to edit the newsletter over these two decades and 
would like to thank all of those who ensured the steady stream of 
content and reflection. I will also remember the ‘behind-the- 
scenes’ Drugnet Europe, including editing amidst the boxes as 
I moved house, late night writing beside a sleeping baby and 
proofreading in countless locations both near and far! 
On that note, a final thank you. We look forward to engaging with 
our readers in the new digital format in 2018.
 Kathy Robertson 
UPDATE
To ensure that you keep up to date with EMCDDA activities, 
events, products and services, please sign up to receive our 
news electronically by completing the subscription form at 
http://eepurl.com/coizO9